STATE OF MTCHTGAN

RICK SNYDER
GOVERNOR

EXECUTIVE OFFICE
LANS TNG

BRIAN CALLEY
LT. GOVERNOR

In the spirit of transparency and accountability, I am releasing my emails related to Flint from 2014 and 2015. The Flint water crisis is an extraordinary circumstance and therefore I'm taking this unprecedented step of releasing my emails to ensure that the people of Michigan know the truth. I am committed to solving this crisis and look forward to working with all Michiganders to help the residents of Flint.

t+/: __, Z =-6 -F ft . . . .l-= :. 6 _ __ Date: _.......:.
~

I

_

Governor

FJ~ ~h

Maintenance of Privilege

·

One document, an email from January 3, 2014, has been produced in a redacted format because it contains privileged attorney-client communications about the matter of Welch v Brown, Case No. 13-1476 (6th Circuit, 2014), a matter not related to the Flint water situation. The release of these documents is not a waiver by the Governor or the Executive Office of the attorney-client privilege, the executive privilege, the deliberative process privilege, or any other legal privilege. These documents do not, are not intended to, and cannot be relied upon to, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any external party.

·

·

/ Date: __J__

I _ ~ _L_ i _ ~ _ b __

~, _,Af~/ James Redford ~~
Legal Counsel to Governor Snyder

GEORGE W. ROMNEY BUILDING · 111 SOUTH CAPITOL AVENUE · LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909

www.michigan.gov

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From: Sent: To:
Gadola, Michael (GOV) Friday, Janual)l 03, 2014 2:21 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Roberts, John (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) Scott, Allison (GOV) FW: 13-1476 John Welch, et al v. Michael Brown, et al "signed opinion filed" (2:12cv-13808) 201401030930.pdf; Welch Amicus Brief.pdf High

Cc:
Subject: Attachments: Importance:

1

3

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:

Sent: To: Subject:

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Wednesday, January 15, 2014 5:11 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Larkin, Brian (GOV) FYI: Flint SC2

FYI OBAMA ADMINISTRATION TO ANNOUNCE SEVEN ADDITIONAL CITIES PARTICIPATING IN THE STRONG CITIES, STRONG COMMUNITIES INITIATIVE WASHINGTON- Tomorrow at 10:30 a.m. (EDT). U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Secretary Shaun Donovan and White House Domestic Policy Council (DPC) Director Cecilia Munoz will host a media call to announce the expansion of the Strong Cities, Strong Communities Initiative (SC2) to seven new cities on 1-16-14. As part of the Obama Administration's commitment to help cities recover from the economic recession, the seven new locations will receive technical advice and expertise from federal inter-agency teams. Beginning in January 2014, SC2 teams will engage in the following locations: St. Louis, MO; Gary, IN; Flint, Ml; Brown sville, TX; Rockford, IL; Macon, GA; and Rocky Mount, NC. The primary goal of the SC2 Teams is to help these cities more effectively invest existing resources, provide advice and expertise in support of local priorities, better align federal program s and investm ents, and facilitate new partnerships and peer learning opportunities. Best, Harvey

1

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:
Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Friday, January 24, 2014 5:33 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV) Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Roberts, John (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth

Sent: To: Cc: Subject: Attachments:

(GOV)
RE: Followup to Flint Meeting on Public Safety Flint Request Ltr 012414.pdf

I am having email, not sure if these are going through, but the last one was sent without the attachment, please note the attachment in this communication. From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Sent: Friday, January 24 2014 5:29PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Roberts, John (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) Subject: Followup to Flint Meeting on Public Safety
Governor, During the discussion on public safety in Flint on December 16, 2013, you asked the group to come together and present you with an ask that would enhance Flint's initiatives on public safety. Attached is a letter in response to your request. Best, Harvey

1

From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Sent: Friday, January 24, 2014 5:33PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored mlchigan.gov>; Etue, l<riste (MSP) <EtueK@michigan.gov>; Roberts, John (GOV) <robertsj9@ michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov> Subject: RE: Followup to Flint Meeting on Public Safety I am having email, not sure if these are going through, but the last one was sent without the attachment, please note the attachment in this communication.
From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Sent: Friday, January 2014 5:29PM To: Snyder, Rick ( Cc: Muchmore, Dennis Subject: Followup to Flint Meeting on Public Safety

John (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)

Governor, During the discussion on public safety in Flint on December 16, 2013, you asked the group to come together and present you with. an ask that would enhance Flint's initiatives on public safety. Attached is a letter in response to your request. Best, Harvey

1

C][TY OJF JFLINT
OFFICE OF THE EMERGENCY A1ANAG.ER

.Dante)] Earley, ICMA-CM, MJ>A

Emergency Manager
January 24,2014 Mr. Harvey Hollins Office ofthe Governor Mr. Hollins: You asked that the City of Flint respond to the Governor's offer to the City ofFlint and Genesee County to make an "ask" on behalf of public safety initiatives. These·were to be strategies/ initiatives which were unfunded and which could penetrate the public consciousness. We are presenting for the G~vemor's consideration three st.rat.egies/initiatives which fit these criteria: 1) Operation Fresh Start Regional Operation This-is.Commun~ty: B,t;mefit/Tnist Building Initiative Request: $250,000/yr 2) Area Clime Team- A.C.T. This is·a Crime Reduction Strategy Request: $L02 mi1lionlyr 3) Lifeline Regional Crime Intervention Strategy This is Clime Prevention Strategy Request: $877,000/yr .Together, these tluee proposals would cost $2,147,000 per year.

In order for each ofthese activities to have lasting impact it will be necessary to receive funding to allow three
continuous years of operation. This priority order is the view ofthe City ofFJint and we understand that these strategies/initiatives need to be reviewed and supported by the community members who participated in the Gove1'nor's Public Safety visit in December 2013. We appreciate the Govemor's continued support as we work to improve public safety conditions in the City of Flint and Genesee County. Sincerely,

~&a~__..____

£/JA--.
-y.~

Darnell Earley, IGI\{A-CM, MPA Bn~ergency Manager -~f------Attachments: Project details (3)

City of Flint o 1101 S. Saginan· Street o Flint, Michiga:n 48502 www.cityofflint.com o (810) 766-7346 o Fax: (810) 766-7218

Opel'ation Fresh Start Regional Operatio11;

Infl·oduction;

Flint Lifelines and the City of Flint Police Department would like to propose Operation Fresh Start. This is a collaborative initiative with the purpose of assisting City of FHnt residents, and the surrounding suburbs who through various reasons, have found themselves in an untenable situation where they are include9 in the population of individuals who have active arrest warrants. There are approximately 40,000 warrants countywide and 23,000 in the City of the Flint; the majority of warrants are misdemeanor warrants, victimless crimes, or civil infractions. The failure to addl'ess these violatio11s has resulted in wanants being issued and driver responsibility fines being levied. These wan·ants affect an individual's ability to become employed and their ability to seek employ~ent and to provide financially for their families. Given these pressures, there is a high probability tl.fat criminal conduct can occur.

. Operation Fresh Start is a means to address and eliminate these barriers and provide a starting point for individuals to improve their ability to become better citizens.
Operation Fresh Start will include the following agencies as stal{eholders:

Purpose of Operation Fresh Start;

1. Flint Lifelines 2. Flint Police Department . 3. 681h District Court/ 6i11 District Comt 4. Secretary of State · 5. City Prosecutor's office 6. County Prosecutor's office 7. · Ecmnenical conununity 8. Business community 9. Health Coalition 10. Dept. of Health and Human Services 11. Mental Health services 12. Educational 13. Genesee County Landbank 14. Genesee Count-y ShedffDepartment
Operation Fl·esh Start Implementation; Operation Fresh statt will focus on individuals with misdemeanor warrants punishable by less than 90 days & less than a $500.00 fine.

The operation will be based on targeting one ( 1) zip code at a time in the City of Flint(County of Genesee, on a specified day, and partnering with a faith based institution as a base of operation w~thln the specified zip code. This scenario will repeat itself until each zip code has .hosted the operation. Persons within the zip code will come to the location and interact with the appropriate City, County or State representatives to recall warrants, adjudicate civ.il .infractions, and settle fines and fees and apply for or receive a valid state license. Additionally, community service organizations will be present to offer assistance if services are needed. ·

The synergy of Lifelines and Operation Fresh Start will compliment each other and allow for sustainable solutions to 1he community of Flint and the cotmty of Genesee. Personnel and Cost: (projected 8 hour day) Position (1) Flint PD Sergeant (site supv) (4) Flint PD Officer (site s~cm·ity) (2) Genesee County D/Sheriff (site secmlty) (2) Genesee County D/Sheriff (Work force)
(will deploy 20 hours per week for 52 weeks*)

(2) Michigan State Troopers Lifeline (Media, Flyers etc... )

I.T. (Equipment & services)
67th Districf Court cost (Judges, admin staff etc ... ) 68th District Court cost (Judges, admin staff etc...) Michigan Department of Secretary of State -Mobile Office
~Staff

Estimated Total.

$250,000.00

Challenges to overcome prior to implementation:, 1. 67'h Distdct court entanglements (Ward Chapman) 2. GCACP input (ChiefTolbmt) 3. Video Conferencing from site to comi (Chief Tolbert) . 4. Homs of operation (when can the judges do this?) (67 1h/68tll Dish·ict Court Judges) 5. Will any other jurisdiction want their judges to hear their cases

* Depending on number of individuals electing to conduct community service in lieu of payment of
fines.

The City of Flint Police Departrrient Crime Reduction Strategy Area Crime Team I A. C. T. The City of Flint Police Department is actively pursuing all relevant strategies in an effort to truly address crime and criminal behavior at their root cause and locations. Gone are the days of reactionary policing, we must be proactive in our approach. IdentifYing criminal trends through analysis and addressing them head on is our focus under this initiative. The leadership of the City of Flint realizes that a complete law enforcement response relies upon a combination of a ttue data driven approach and boots on the ground efforts. This type of response shall allow for the realization of a true and sustainable reduction in all crimes within the City of Flint. This reduction in crime shall allow fol' the recaptudng of neighborhoods by our concerned residents, the strengthening of community police partnerships and raised awareness and unity tow~ds the common goal of safer neighborhoods through lasting crime reduction. The City of Flint is proposing to assemble and utilize an Area Crime Team (A.C.T.). This highly trained and specialized unit shall deploy resources into very specific locations to address specific high crime targets. This can be exclusive to a singular target such as a known homicide suspect or a specific target of general crimes and trends such as gang behavior or other part one crimes elevated .in data identified specific areas. This initiative shall hire additional police resources to accomplish this targeted offensive in a collaborative effort. While the City of Flint shall be the lead agency and coordinator of this program, we shall form pru.tnerships under this initiative with the Michigan State Police, the Genesee County Sheriff's Depru.tment, the Michigan Department of Corrections and the Genesee County Prosecutor's office. Each agency shall play a vital role towards oul' goal of hue crime reduction. Tlll'ougll the hiring of additional resources for each agency, we also shall receive the ancillru.y benefit of each agency and all of their existing resources when applicable. Leveraging these agencies shall also allow for follow up within the entire Genesee County area when necessary through investigation and leads. We propose to hire one Flint Police Sergeant and three Flint Police Officers, two Michigan State Police Troopers, one Genesee Cow1ty Sheriff Deputy, one MDOC employee and one Genesee County Deputy Prosecutor. This program will be operational for a three year period. We envision that this team of officers shall become a spearhead to address major offenders and trends with significant results. They shall work as a team and gain influence with the community through their transparency and ability to work closely with community partners. This team shall have la~er focus and target extremely specific crimes and locations based on Flint Police gathered crime data as analyzed by the Michigan State Police. Once a crime or area has been identified, this unit shall saturate the determined area with a goal of total

dismption to the offending behavior. The officers shall perform the initial response, investigations and arrest ofthe perpetrators with the assistance of the MDOC resource. The prosecuting attorney shall have oversight of all cases involving tills unit to ensUl'e ve11ical prosecution. Additionally, a victim's assistance pro~·am will facilitate victim services for individuals victimized by crime in the targeted area. (Dependent on grant award) The cost ofthis effort shall be.primarily wage and fringe of these mission dedicated officers and staff. Their very existence shall be grant funded, and by design they will be deployed exclusively towards the goal of this program. We request the following items to be funded for 1his program:
Position One (1) Flint Police Sergeant:
Wa~e and Fr!ne;e

$109,271.27 x 1 x 3yrs $100,979.82 X 3 X 3y:rs $100,000.00 x. 1 x 3yrs $64,435.00 x 2 x 3yrs $106,303 x.l x. 3yis

1 Year Cost $109,271.27

3 Year Total $327,813.81

Three (3) Flint Police Officers: One (1) Genesee County Deputy: Two (2) Michigan State Troopers:
(Wage Only - Fringe notlnclndBd)

$302,939.46 $100,000.00 $128,870.00 $106,303.00 $162,000.00 $45,000.00 $954,383.73

$908,818.38 $300,000.00 $386,610.00 $318,909.00 $486,000.00 $135,000.00 $'2,863, 151.19

One (1) MDOC agent:

One (1) Genesee County Prosecutor: · $162,000.00 x. 1 x 3yrs One (1) crime analyst: $45,000.00x 1 x 3yrs Sub-Total
An-ticipated G1·antMatch

Victim Assistance Program

$60,000 x 3yrs Total Cost

$60,000.00 $1,014,383.73

$180,000.00 $3,043,151.19

Lifeline Regional Crime Intel'Vention Strategy

The City Flint is in a vety advantageous position to enhance om· conununity engagement program named Lifeline, this program is similar to the Cease Fire yo-qth violence reduction program model. This program model contains almost all of the elements of the Cease Fire model, and the community-based research, networking and consensus-building process this program model has proved su~cessful in cities across the United States and in Califomia (e.g., Stockton, with implementation also underway in Oaldand and Sa~ Francisco) and consists offive (5) basic elements:
1. Crime data collection and analysis l'elated to gun violence) including the geographic location of violent incidents, demographic information on individuals invohred in gun violence, and patterns of gang violence. The Flint Police Depa1tment and

has this data, but needs additional resources to analyze and present it in formats useful to staff and the community.
2. Organization of a worldng group to design and implement the local Strategy. Flint has already started doing this, and must expand its current efforts to include employment training and placement providers, community and faith leaders and the Genesee County Sheriffs Deprutment (we already have the other listed parties actively engaged in the process).

3. Direct communication with gang members and youth most likely to commit gun violence. This element features community outreach and community meeting to

commUnicate directly to those most involved in youth violence. Meeting attendees are given a two-prut message: a) gtm violence must stop inlinediately or criminal justice agencies will inte1vene quickly and forcefully against those responsible; and b) the working group is there to suppmt the gang members and youth with intensive services and employment. This phase will come once the program is implemented. 4. Employment opporhmities. Meaningful employment oppornmities are provided to gang members and youth participating in the program, with coW1seling, training and educational resources and programs used to prepare the youth for successful employment. Experience across the country shows that the universe of youth requiring · these services is expanding rapidly. 5. Build a strategic law enforcement partnership. An effective strategic partnership with local law enforcement, county law enforcement and county probation is essential for long-term success. Law enforcement is encouraged to tru·get resources to the small group of youth who "drive" youth violence, providing not only gang suppression, but also pl'oviding an incentive for youth to pruticipate in gang diversion pl'ograms.

Ancillary coordinating issues: Collabontion with other local agencies when needed: such as school districts, existing county juvenile justice coordinating committees, law enforcement agencies (city police, county sheriff, county probation, and district attorney), and community based organizations. Collaboration with a nsearch Major University, as a Research Partner to collect and analyze metrics. Form a Cootdinating and Advisory Council with members from all of the local agencies noted above, whose primary functions will include prioritizing the use funds. Personnel/Budget: Position One (1) Flint Police Sergeant: Two (2) Flint Police Officers: (Violence Prevention Ofcs) One (1) Genesee Cotmty Deputy: Two (2) Michigan State Trool?ers:
(Wages Only- Fringes not Included)

Wage and Fringe $109,271.27 x 1 x 3yrs $100,979.82 x 2 x 3yrs $100,000.00 X 1 X 3yrs .$64,435.00 ~ 2 x 3yrs

1 Year Cost

$109,271.27 $201,959.64 $100,000.00 $128,870.00 $106,303.00 $162,000.00 $45,000.00 $853,403.91

Total $327,813.81 $605,878.92 $300,000.00 $386,610.00 $318,909.00 $486,000.00 $135,000.00 $2,560,211.73

One (I) MDOC agent: $106,303 x 1 x 3yrs One (1) Genesee Co~mty Prosecutor: $162,000.00 X 1 X 3 One (1) Crime Analyst: . $45,000.00 X 1 X 3yrs Total Wages and Fringes Additional Cost: Administrative Supplied IT .wireless Commtmication Operational equipment

Detail list available x 3 yrs Hm'dwal.'e and Software Cellular Phones x 3 yrs Surv I Equip (one time cost) Total Additional Cost Total Cost

$3,333.33

$2,733.33 $2,019.67 $15,000.00 $23,086.33 $876,490.24

$10,000.00 $8,200.00
$6,059~ 00

$45,000.00 $69,259.00 $2,629,470.73

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Friday, April 25, 2014 4:27 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Fw: PRESS RELEASE: Flint Officially Begins Using River Flint.River.Transition.4.25.14.pdf

Sent:
To:

Subject: Attachments:

Best, Harvey Hollins

-----Original message----From: Jason Lorenz <jlorenz@cityofflint.com> Sent: Fri , Apr 25,2014 20:23:43 GMT+OO:OO Subject: PRESS RELEASE: Flint Officially Begins Using River

For Immediate Release

City of Flint Officially Begins Using Flint River as Temporary Primary Water Source

Flint, Michigan- April 25, 2014 - For the first time in fifty years, the City of Flint is using the Flint River- patt

of the Saginaw River watershed-as a primary water source for city residents. Today the valve to the pipeline from Detroit was closed and the Flint River officially became Flint's water supply. The temporary switchover is scheduled to support the city' s primary water needs for the next two years while construction of the forthcoming pipeline from Lake Huron is completed by Kat·egnondi Water Authority. Officials from the City of Flint, the Genesee County Drain Commission and the Michigan Depattment of Environmental Quality were all on hand to witness the historic event.

The Flint River was once the primary source of water for city residents up to the 1960s. Over the past 40 years, it has provided water to city residents as a back-up to water provided to us by Detroit. During
1

our patinership with Detroit, Flint has had to transition to the use of the Flint River for residential water on a few different occasions, with the most recent temporary switchover happening in 2009. Each temporm·y stint on local water proved tlu·ee things to city employees and residents alike: That a transition to local river water could be done seamlessly, and that it was both sensible and safe for us to use our own water as a primary water source in Flint. Even with a proven track record of providing perfectly good water for Flint, there still remains lingering unce1iainty about the quality of the water. In an effort to dispel myths and promote the truth about the Flint River and its viability as a residential water resource, there have been numerous studies and tests conducted on its water by several different independent organizations. In addition to what has been found in independent studies, it is also the responsibility of the City of Flint Water Service Center to continually test the water provided to city residents. Michael Prysby of the Michigan DEQ Office of Drinking Water verified that " the quality of the water being put out meets all of our drinking water standards and Flint water is safe to drink."

For nearly 10 years Mike Glasgow has worked in the laboratory at the City ofFlint Water Service Center. He has run countless tests on our drinking water to ensure its safety for public use. Mike has not only conducted tests on water provided to us by Detroit, but also on local water from nearby rivers, lakes and streams including the Flint River. When asked if over the last decade if he has seen any abnormalities of major concern in the water, his response was an emphatic, "No." In his words, "there has been nothing seen that was of major concern," during his ongoing tenure working in the lab. "The tests results have shown that our water is not only safe, but of the high quality that Flint customers have come to expect," announced DPW Director Howard Croft, " we are proud of the end result. "

Apart from the water plant's devotion to ensunng that our water is good, Flint is doubly blessed in having the Flint River Watershed Coalition as a separate organization dedicated to monitoring the overall welfare of local bodies of water, overseeing more than 30 different nearby locations. Rebecca Fedewa has been director of the watershed coalition since 2008. By vi1iue of her passion for her work and her position on the board, she is very conversant with the condition of the Flint River. In her words, "The Flint River is increasingly healthy, and completely suitable as a drinking water source." Fedewa and FRWC are working closely with the city "to monitor flows and habitats between the intake and the waste water treatment plant to ensure there are minimal to no impacts to the overall health of the river."

2

FRWC also invites city residents to be a part of their monitoring exercises during this spring in order "to gain firsthand knowledge in the health and vitality of our Flint River." Mayor Dayne Walling invited everyone at today's event to toast to Flint's water. "It's regular, good, pure drinking water, and it's right in our backyard," said Mayor Walling, "this is the first step in the right direction for Flint, as we take this monumental step forward in controlling the future of our community's most precious resource."

-END-

-Jason Lorenz Public Information Officer City of Flint (81 0) 237-2039 jlorenz@cityofflint.com

3

Darnell Earley
ICMA·CM, MPA Emergency Manager

Dayne Walling
Mayor

Jason Lorenz Public Information Officer (81 0) 237-2039 jlorenz@cityofflint.com For Immediate Release

City of Flint Officially Begins Using Flint River as Temporary Primary Water Source
Flint, Michigan - April 25, 2014- For the first time in fifty years , the City of Flint is using

the Flint River- part of the Saginaw River watershed- as a primary water source for city residents. Today the valve to the pipeline from Detroit was closed and the Flint River officially became Flint's water supply. The temporary switchover is scheduled to support the city's primary water needs for the next two years while construction of the forthcoming pipeline from Lake Huron is completed by Karegnondi Water Authority. Officials from the City of Flint, the Genesee County Drain Commission and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality were all on hand to witness the historic event.

The Flint River was once the primary source of water for city residents up to the 1960s. Over the past 40 years, it has provided water to city residents as a back-up to water provided to us by Detroit. During our partnership with Detroit, Flint has had to transition to the use of the Flint River for residential water on a few different occasions, with the most recent temporary switchover happening in 2009. Each temporary stint on local water proved three things to city employees and residents alike: That a transition to local river water could be done seamlessly, and that it was both sensible and safe for us to use our own water as a primary water source in Flint. -CONTINUECity Hall 1101 S. Saginaw Street- Flint, Michigan 48502 810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.cityoffiint.com

Darnell Earley
ICMA·CM, MPA Emergency Manager

Dayne Walling
Mayor

Even with a proven track record of providing perfectly good water for Flint, there still remains lingering uncertainty about the quality of the water. In an effort to dispel myths and promote the truth about the Flint River and its viability as

a residential water resource, there have been numerous studies and tests conducted on its water by several different independent organizations. In addition to what has been found in independent studies, it is also the responsibility of the City of Flint Water Service Center to continually test the water provided to city residents. Michael Prysby of the Michigan DEQ Office of Drinking Water verified that "the quality of the water being put out meets all of our drinking water standards and Flint water is safe to drink."

For nearly 10 years Mike Glasgow has worked in the laboratory at the City of Flint Water Service Center. He has run countless tests on our drinking water to ensure its safety for public use. Mike has not only conducted tests on water provided to us by Detroit, but also on local water from nearby rivers, lakes and streams including the Flint River. When asked if over the last decade if he has seen any abnormalities of major concern in the water, his response was an emphatic, "No." In his words, "there has been nothing seen that was of major concern ," during his ongoing tenure working in the lab. "The tests results have shown that our water is not only safe, but of the high quality that Flint customers have come to expect," announced DPW Director Howard Croft, "we are proud of the end result."

Apart from the water plant's devotion to ensuring that our water is good, Flint is doubly blessed in having the Flint River Watershed Coalition as a separate organization -CONTINUECity Hall 1101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 FAX: 810-766-72 18 www.cityoffl int.com 810-766-7346

Darnell Earley
ICMA·CM, MPA Emergency Manager

Dayne Walling
Mayor

dedicated to monitoring the overall welfare of local bodies of water, overseeing more than 30 different nearby locations. Rebecca Fedewa has been director of the watershed coalition since 2008. By virtue of her passion for her work and her position on the board , she is very conversant with the condition of the Flint River. In her words, "The Flint River is increasingly healthy, and completely suitable as a drinking water

source." Fedewa and FRWC are working closely with the city "to monitor flows and habitats between the intake and the waste water treatment plant to ensure there are minimal to no impacts to the overall health of the river."

FRWC also invites city residents to be a part of their monitoring exercises during this spring in order "to gain firsthand knowledge in the health and vitality of our Flint River." Mayor Dayne Walling invited everyone at today's event to toast to Flint's water. "It's regular, good, pure drinking water, and it's right in our backyard," said Mayor Walling, "this is the first step in the right direction for Flint, as we take this monumental step forward in controlling the future of our community's most precious resource."

- END-

City Hall 1101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 81 0-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-72 18 www.cityofllint.com

From: Scott, Allison {GOY) Sent: Friday, January 2015 1:41 PM To: Snyder, Rick (G Subject: FW: jim ananic Follow up on the f lint water from dick p

From: Posthumus/ Dick (GOV) Sent: Thursday1 January 221 2015 12:29 PM To: Scott1 Allison (GOV); Muchmore1 Dennis (GOV); Clement1 Elizabeth (GOV) Subject: RE: jim ananich
0

°

We have two meetings coming up on this next week Wed. The first is an internal meeting with Dennis, Beth, Tom Saxton, John Walsh, Harvey Hollins and myself. Later that day we are meeting with several people from Flint including the EM, Mayor, and Senator Ananich. Dick

From: Scott1 Allison (GOY) Sent: Thursday/ January 221 2015 12:00 PM To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement1 Elizabeth (GOY)
Cc: Posthumus1 Dick (GOY)

Subject: jim ananich

Brought up the flint water topic- any update for Gov on this subject? Dennis, gov thought you were checking into this . Thanks ALS

1

89 (Rev. 11-13)

STATE OF MICHIGAN
RICK SNYDER
GOVERNOR

DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
LANSING

R. KEVIN CLINTON
STATE TREASURER

February 3, 2015

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
www.michigan.gov/treasury draft

Contact: Tel'l'y Stanton, Treasury (517) 335-2167

Dave Murray, Governor
(517) 335-6397

Gov. Ric/c Snyder announces grants helping distressed municipalities with water, public safety, appraisal issues
$8 million awardedfor projects aimed at improving services, quality oflife
LANSING, Mich. -- Gov. Rick Snyder today awarded $8 million to six municipalities to fund various improvement projects, including water system and street lighting enhancements and technology upgrades through the Financially Distressed Cities, Villages, and Townships Grant Program. Municipalities are eligible for the grants ofthey are experiencing one or more conditions indicative of "probable financial stress," as defined by Public Act 436 of2012, the Local Financial Stability and Cl?-oice Act. "Municipalities receiving this special funding are some of the areas hardest hit by the Great Recession," Snyder said. "I am pleased we can offer funding assistance to help these local govemments improve various public services their taxpayers and residents exp ect and deserve." Under the grant program, funding may be used to pay for specific projects, services, or strategies that move a city, village, or township toward financial stability. There was $8 million appropriated for the program with a $2 million cap, per local unit. The following communities will receive fi.mding this year, with projects and amounts noted (alphabetical order): Local Unit
City of Benton Harbor

Project Description
Complete a property reappraisal to provide updated and accurate assessing records. Additionally, conununity enhancement through blight management and sidewalk replacement. Water system enhancement through water main replacements and fire hydrant repairs.

Amount

$475,000 $434,960

City of Benton Harbor

P.O. BOX 30716 · LANSING, MICHIGAN 46909 www.mlchlgan.gov/treasury · (5"17) 373-3200

Page2

City of Ecorse City of Flint City of Flint City of Hamtramck City ofHamtramck City of Hamtramck City of Highland Park City of Inkster City oflnkster City ofinkster City oflnkster City oflnkster · City oflukster · City of Lincoln Park City of Melvindale City of Pontiac City of River Rouge Royal Oak Township Royal Oak Townshi_p

Public safe!)' _enhancement through improved street lighting. Water system enhancement through improved waste management. Water system enhancement through leak detection and pipe assessments. Complete a property reappraisal to provide updated and accurate assessing records. Upgrade City Hall security. Public safety enhancement tluough improved street lighting. Water system enhancement through meter replacement, leak detection, and system repairs. Complete a property reappraisal to provide updated and accurate assessing records. Water system enhancement through fire hydrant repairs. Provide a backup power source for public safety. Public safety enhancement through the creation of a multijurisdictional narcotic team. Public safety enhancement through police officer training. Public safety enhancement through the deployment of an additional police officer. Public safety enhancement through updated technology. Public safety enhancement through fleet replacement of police vehicles and updated technology. Community enhancement through blight management. Public safety enhancement tlu·ough improved street lighting. Additionally, infrastructure replacements to City Hall. Public safety enhancement tlu·ough improved street lighting Public safety enhancement of_l)_olice services.

$350,000 $1,100,000 $900,000 $167,860 $50,000 $404,600 $2,000,000 $73,460 $150,000 $30,000 $240,000 $41,970 $320,000 $143,490 $88,000 $125,000 $591,508 $86,559 $217,593

Applications for the next round of Financially Distressed Cities, Villages, and Townships Grant Program will be available on the Department of Treasmy website this spring. Applications must be submitted to Treasury by the close of business on XXX, XXX 31,
20 15.

Preference is generally given to applicants from local units in which: · A financial emergency has been declared in the past :five years; · An approved deficit elimination plan for the general fund is cmTently in place; or, · Two or more conditions indicating "probable financial distress" currently exist. For more information about ;FDCVT grants, including an application for cities, villages, and townships, visit www.michigan.gov/revenuesharing.

####
*Conditions of"probable financial distress" relating solely to school districts are not included as conditions for FDCVT, as school districts are not eligible.

~~~

S'rA'rll OF MICHIGAN

AICI< SNYDER
GOVf:RNOfl

EXECUTIVE OFFICE
LANSING

a

BRIAN CALLEY
1:(, GOVERNOR

CONTACTS:

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray, Governor's Office 517-335-6397 Terry Stanton, Department of Treasury 517-335-2167

January 18, 2016

Gov. Rick Snyder awards Flint $2 million in Distressed Cities grants for water system infrastructure improvements
Funding to be used for leak detection, waste incinerator replacement
LANSING, Mich.- Gov. Rick Snyder today awarded Flint $2 million in grants for water system infrastructure improvements, part of an overall $8 million plan to help cities through the Financially Distressed Cities, Villages, and Townships Grant Program. Flint is among six municipalities receiving grants through the program. The city will use the funding to detect leaks in its water lines and replace its Water Pollution Control Facility Incinerator. "There are opportunities for the state government to assist Flint city leaders as they address issues related to the city's water system," Snyder said. "These grants will help recovering cities improve public services and infrastructure, improving the quality of life for all residents." The grants to Flint were announced today at the Haskell Community Center by Harvey Hollins, director of the state's Office of Urban Initiatives and Wayne Worl<man, the state's deputy treasurer. They were joined by Dan Wyant, director of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Flint Emergency Manager Jerry Ambrose, Mayor Dayne Walling, state Senate.Minority Leader Jim Ananich, state Reps. Sheldon Neeley and Phil Phelps. Flint was awarded $900,000 to allow the city to hire a contractor to perform a leak detection survey of the city water lines. The city will receive a map of leal< locations and an assessment of leak severity, allowing the city to prioritize leak repair. The project also covers the expense of conducting a water pipe line wall"thickness condition assessment on a portion of the city's pipes. The assessment will guide the city's water main replacement program. The city also was awarded $1.1 million to shut down its current Water Pollution Control Facility incinerator and replace it with new facilities which will allow for the disposal of waste in landfills. The existing facilities are not up to federal Environmental Protection Agency standards.

Municipalities are eligible for the grants of they are experiencing one or more conditions indicative of "probable financial stress," as defined by Public Act 436 of 2012, the Local Financial Stability and Choice Act. Under the grant program, funding may be used to pay for specific projects, services, or strategies that move a city, vi llage, or township toward financial stability. There was $8 million appropriated for the program with a $2 million cap, per local unit.

##

Snyder, Rick {GOV}
From: Sent:

To:

Subject: Attachments:

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Wednesday, April 30, 2014 4:36 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) Talking Points on budget 043014.doc Talking Points on budget 043014.doc

All: The Flint EM will give a budget presentation tomorrow, attached are his basic talking points. I can get you details if needed. Please note that this presentation will result in an anticipated layoff, by December 2014, of 55 public safety personnel (19 fire and 36 police). Harvey

1

Talking Points on City of Flint FY15 & FY16 budget Received from Flint Emergency Manager · The city has an obligation to budget responsibly and that has led to a 2-year budget proposal. The budgets for these two fiscal years are balanced. The City remains in a budgetary crisis that impairs its ability to provide public safety and other city services. However, the city sees this as the beginning, not the end of this process. Over the next six months ./ The city will work to prevent an immediate disruption in public safety- reductions are to be achieved by December 2014, not immediate lay-off\ this will be a managed process . ./ The City is unable to fully fund its Police and Fire Departments at current levels and is unable to provide needed public safety services at current levels. A Comprehensive Police and Fire Study will recommend the most efficient use ofthe city's limited public safety resources . ./ The city will continue working toward a resolution of the retiree health care lawsuit -this is a $5 million additional (and increasing) expense across all City funds . ./ The Mayor and Emergency Manager will seek State support for increased revenue: opportunity for residents to vote on increased income tax rate, State assistance to participate in a voluntary OPEB pool, and increased shared revenue . ./ City will complete organizational restructuring to fully utilize City staff. ./ City will engage our partner organizations throughout the city, county and state for recommendations and support. · Throughout the 2-year budget period the Michigan State Police have indicated that they will continue their directed patrol and investigative support for public safety in Flint. This support has been tremendously valuable to the City of Flint. The city will continue to work together cooperatively and look for ways to enhance this relationship for the safety and security of the residents and visitors. Beyond this budget period the City will still face significant financial challenges without major revenue increases. The 2-year budget gives the City stability while it works to achieve a long-term solution.

·

·

Anticipated public safety layoffs are 19 fire and 36 police for a total public safety reduction of 55. Revenues needed to prevent the public safety layoffs is ca. $4 million]

1

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Cc:

Subject: Attachments:

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) Wednesday, July 16, 2014 4:48 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV) Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Ellison, Melanie (GOV) Q2 Public Safety Stats 2014 Second Quarter Stats.doc

Governor, Attached are the Q2 Public Safety numbers that you mentioned on your issues list and wanted to see. Very positive signs in Flint (-9.9%), Saginaw (-31.2%), and Detroit (-18.7%) compared to last year. MSP is also working on a report to show the monthly crime statistics since we went into the Secure Cities, which will give us even better context on the progress we have made. We'll be working in Comms on ways to promote this progress. Thanks Jarrod

1

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Subject: Attachments:

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Thursday, Ju ly 24, 2014 2:36 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) PRESS RELEASE: Operation Fresh Start OFS.Fiyer.pdf; Operation Fresh Start Release.pdf

Governor, During the Flint public safety/community meeting you attended in December 2013, ChiefTolbert talked about his idea to assist residents with certain misdemeanors that result in outstanding warrants. Operations. Below is information regarding the launch of Operation Fresh Start. Best, Harvey

For Immediate Release

Operation: Fresh Start Program will Help Residents in 48501 & 48502 Zip Codes with Certain Misdemeanors Find Resolution to Outstanding Warrants

Flint, Michigan - July 23, 2014- The City of Flint Police Department and Flint Lifelines have developed a program

called Operation: Fresh Start which will offer residents with outstanding misdemeanor warrants in the City of Flint to find resolution and avoid jail time and court costs. The program will focus on wanants by zip code, the first two being 48501 and 48502 for this event. The event will be held on Monday, July 28,2014 from I O:OOam to 4:00pm at the Hubbard Building of the University of Michigan-Flint, off Chavez Drive near Campus Drive and Mill St.

Operation: Fresh Start features partners from the City of Flint, Genesee County, the State of Michigan and community-based organizations working together to offer settlement of minor civil infractions as well as help participants apply for a driver's license, find assistance for health and human services, employment
1

opportunities and continuing education advice. This means that anyone with a primary address in the zip codes above is invited to attend and seek resolution to their legal problem.

Police Chief James Tolbe1i recognized a need for a program such as this after learning that there are about 23,000 outstanding wanants in the City of Flint dating all the way back to the 1970s. "The failure to address these violations has resulted in warrants being issued and driver responsibility fines being levied," noted Chief Tolbert. "These warrants affect an individual's ability to become employed and their ability to seek employment and to provide financially for their families. Given these pressures, there is a high probability that criminal conduct can occur."

ChiefTolbe1i also plans on holding more Operation Fresh Stmi events for other zip code areas throughout Flint in the near future. Residents from the 48501 and 48502 zip codes interested in participating must bring a valid photo 10 with their cmTent address showing they live in those areas. Residents with felony warrants or misdemeanor wanants for child support, DUI and related offenses are not eligible.

Operation Fresh Start is made possible through collaborative effmis by the Flint Police Department, Flint Lifelines, Genesee County Prosecutor's Office, Michigan Secretary of State, Michigan Depmiment of Corrections, Michigan Depmiment of Human Services, Michigan Depmiment ofTreasury, Flint Area Congregations Together (FACT), Genesee County Land Bank, Community Resolution Center, Metro Community Development, Mott Community College Workforce Education Center, University of MichiganFlint Depmtment of Public Safety and the Michigan State Police.

-ENDMEDIA AVAILABILITY: Police Chief James Tolbert and other Flint Lifelines members will be made available for interview and media appearances. Please respond to this message or call the number below for arrangements.
-Jason Lorenz
2

Public Information Officer City of Flint (81 0) 237-2039 j lorenz@cityofflint.com

3

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From: Sent: To: Cc: Subject: Attachments:

Ellison, Melanie (GOV) Friday, September 12, 2014 9:40AM Snyder, Rick (GOV) Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); Utley, Corey (GOV); Ellison, Melanie (GOV) Fwd: Flint updates Gov Briefing- Flint.docx; ATTOOOOl.htm

Governor, Attached is additional information from MEDC re: Flint. Please let us know if you have any questions. Thanks, Melanie Sent from my iPad Begin forwarded message:
From: Melissa Dansereau <dansereaum@michigan.org> Date: September 12, 2014 at 9:18:41 AM EDT To: "Ellison, Melanie (GOV) (EIIisonM2@michigan.gov)" <EIIisonM2@michigan.gov> Subject: Flint updates

Hi Melanie. Here are some Flint updates. Melissa M. Dansereau Business Analyst, Business Development- Sales Operations Michigan Economic Development Corporation 300 N. Washington Square I Lansing, Ml 48913 517.489.9018 melissa@michigan.org This message contains information which may be confidential and privileged. Unless you are the intended recipient (or authorized to receive this message for the intended recipient), you may not use, copy, disseminate or disclose to anyone the message or any information contained in the message. If you have received the message in error, please advise the sender by reply e-mail, and delete the message. Thank you very much.

1

Flint City update
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Staff Lead: Khalfani Stephens, Business Development Manager, 517-410-9377, stephensk@michigan.org BACKGROUND

The City of Flint is on a slow but steady road to recovery. Governance has improved as they work to create a transition plan to move from Emergency Manager to local oversight. The work on the regional water system is proceeding well. Business development is handled primarily by the Flint & Genesee Chamber of Commerce. The MEDC collaborates very closely with the Chamber, as they are the lead Collaborative Development Council (CDC) representative for MEDC Region 6. Region 6 also has the I-69 Corridor Next Michigan Development Corporation initiative. This initiative is led by the Flint & Genesee Chamber of Commerce. MEDC is currently working on the following projects in the Flint region:

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From: Scott, Allison (GOV) Wednesday, October 01, 2014 11:55 AM Snyder, Rick (GOV) Fwd: CITY OF FLINT DRINKING WATER, GOVERNOR' S OFFICE BRIEFING PAPER Governor Briefing -City of Flint 10-1-14.docx; ATTOOOOl.htm; Governor Briefing -City of Flint 10-1-14.pdf; ATT00002.htm; Flint Monthly Pumpage Comparison.pdf; ATT00003 .htm; ODWMA-399-022.pdf; ATT00004.htm

Sent:
To:

Subject: Attachments:

Sent from my iPad Begin forwarded message:
From: "Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ)" <rHELENM2@michigan.gov> To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" <scotta12@michigan.gov>, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" <muchmored@michigan.gov>, "Brader, Valerie (GOV)" <braderv@michigan.gov> Cc: "Wurfel, Brad (DEQ)" <WurfelB@michigan.gov>, "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" <WyantD@michigan.gov>, "Datema, Maggie (DEQ)" <DatemaM@michigan.gov>, "Sygo, Jim (DEQ)" <SygoJ@michigan.gov>, "Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV)" <wisniewskiw@michigan.gov>, "West, Samantha (GOV)" <WestS2@michigan.gov> Subject: CITY OF FLINT DRINKING WATER, GOVERNOR'S OFFICE BRIEFING PAPER

Dear Governor, Dennis, and Val: Per your request, the attached briefing paper is on the City of Flint drinking water situation. Director Dan Wyant has asked that I send this to you. A Word version as well as a pdf version is attached. We have also included a copy of the policy ODWMA-399-022 which specifically provides guidance regarding boil water advisory situations, and a chati showing the significant increase in the City of Flint' s water demands following the extreme conditions experienced this past winter. Allison, please forward to the Govemor. Thank you. If you have any questions or need further information, please let us know. Thank you. Mary Beth Mary Beth Thelen Management Assistant to Director Dan Wyant Depatiment of Environmental Quality Constitution Hall, 6th Floor South Phone: 517-284-6712 or 284-6700 (new numbers) Fax: 517-241-7401 Thelenm2@michigan.gov<mailto :Thelenm2@michigan. gov>

1

Attachments

2

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY GOVERNOR'S OFFICE BRIEFING PAPER CITY OF FLINT DRINKING WATER

What contributed to the Boil Water Advisories in the city of Flint? A number of factors, not one specific cause, likely contributed to the Boil Water Advisories (BWAs) in the city of Flint during August and September 2014. While use of the Flint River has increased the amount of natural organic matter in the city's water, the Flint Water Treatment Plant (WTP) has performed well above treatment requirements for organic carbon removal. In addition, less than 20 percent of the water system was included in the advisory area. If treatment had been compromised , detections would have been widespread throughout the city, rather than in such a localized area . The city's water distribution system has suffered from a lack of infrastructure investment and asset management. Most of the city's over 550 miles of water mains are now over 75 years old and constructed of cast iron piping. Cast iron pipe is subject to internal corrosion, called tuberculation, which causes buildup on the pipe interior, leading to water quality issues, reduced flow and pressures, and leakage. Tuberculation also encourages the development of biofilms, layers of bacteria that attach to the interior pipe wall. Biofilm growth is common in areas of piping with little or no disinfectant residual, and together with tuberculation can clog water lines to the point of insufficient water pressure. The city has also experienced decades of a declining user base and water use associated with vacant homes, commercial businesses, and industrial property. Declining water use leads to excess residence time within the city's distribution pipes and water storage facilities , accelerating tuberculation, biofilm growth , and disinfectant residual degradation . While the city has recently seen an infusion of funding for blight removal, contractors completing this work have been improperly using fire hydrants, causing hydraulic disturbances that dislodged and suspended settled debris, which may have contributed to the bacterial contamination . The winter of 2014 was also one of the coldest experienced by the water system. The city, which historically has unaccounted water losses of over 30 percent, has seen even greater losses since February 2014 due to an increase in cold weather-related water main breaks and leaks. The city lacks a formal maintenance program for its over 7,250 valves, which would normally be used to limit impacts during break repairs. Two valves on the transmission line used to supply the area of the BWAs were found to be closed during the city's investigation, causing longer residence time, reduced disinfectant residual , reduced flow, and reduced pressure. One of these valves has remained broken.

Governor's Office Briefing Paper City of Flint Drinking Water Page 2

The BWAs also occurred during the warmest and, for 2014, relatively wet periods of August and September. Warm weather conditions are not only more conducive to bacterial growth but also degrade the water's disinfectant residual carried out from the WTP more quickly. Longer residence times, biofilms, and tuberculation also contribute to disinfectant residual degradation . Warm wet weather conditions also allow water contaminated with bacteria to pool around piping with leaks and breaks. Process for Issuance and Cancelation of a Boil Water Advisory There are a number of conditions that can trigger BWAs. This includes the following: Bacteria Monitoring Detections Bacteria Standards Violations Treatment System Failures Waterborne Disease Outbreaks Loss of System Pressure Water Main Breaks Other Interruptions in Service

The Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) has developed a policy and procedure regarding BWAs to help guide staff, provide consistency, and maintain public health. A PDF of Policy and Procedure No. ODWMA-399-022 is being forwarded with this briefing paper. BWAs may be self-initiated by the water system , issued collaboratively in consultation with the DEQ, or when necessary mandated by the DEQ. Requesting customers to boil the water when bacterial contamination has occurred provides an added barrier of public health protection. The BWAs that recently occurred in the city of Flint were associated with bacteria monitoring detections and violations of bacteria standards. These advisories were issued by the city of Flint collaboratively in consultation with the DEQ. Current regulations regarding monitoring and standards for bacteria in water distribution systems were developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, have been in effect since 1990, and were incorporated into the Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act, 1976 PA 399, as amended. There are a variety of bacteria, parasites, and viruses that can potentially cause health problems if humans ingest them in drinking water. Testing water for each of these potential pathogens would be difficult and expensive. Instead, water systems test for total coliform and E. coli. Total coliform bacteria react to water treatment in a manner similar to many pathogens. Therefore, the presence of total coliform in drinking water indicates there may be a pathway for pathogens or other contaminants to enter the system. The absence of total coliforms in the distribution system minimizes the likelihood that pathogens are present. E. coli is itself a pathogen, and its detection would be direct evidence of a health risk.

Governor's Office Briefing Paper City of Flint Drinking Water Page 3

Once a BWA has been issued, time is needed to investigate potential causes and implement corrective measures. The larger the water system , the more time this may take. Once corrective measures have been taken, samples must be collected and analyzed to confirm that bacteria are no longer present. Using the most common analytical method, samples must be incubated for a period of 24 hours before results can be obtained . In situations where the bacterial contamination has been confirmed, two consecutive rounds of safe samples collected at least 24 hours apart are normally obtained before canceling a BWA. Adding each of these steps together, a normal response period to cancel a BWA under these circumstances would be expected to take at least 3 to 4 days. Recent History of the City of Flint Water System Historically, the city of Flint had been a customer of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) while simultaneously maintaining the Flint WTP to provide emergency backup service using the Flint River. The WTP performed quarterly test operations to maintain readiness and was utilized twice in 2009, supplying water once for 2 days and the other for 3 days. In April 2013 the city of Flint notified the DWSD that it would be terminating service in the future and contracting for raw water service from the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). Work on the KWA pipeline from Lake Huron broke ground in June 2013 and is expected to be completed with connection in late 2016. In August 2013 Rowe Professional Services Company completed an engineering proposal for improvements to the Flint WTP that would allow continuous operation of the WTP utilizing the Flint River in lieu of continuing service from the DWSD until completion of the KWA pipeline. In March 2014 the city of Flint entered into a Consent Agreement with the DEQ regarding the Flint WTP's lime sludge facility. In April 2014 the DEQ issued a construction permit for improvements to the Flint WTP. On April 25, 20 14 , the city of Flint began continuous operation of the WTP, using water from the Flint River and discontinued the purchase of water from the DWSD. A BWA was issued for August 15-20, 2014, for a portion of the city of Flint due to localized detections of total coliform and E. coli bacteria. Another BWA was issued for September 5-9, 2014, due to localized detections of total coliform bacteria in the same and adjacent portions of the city of Flint. The advisory covered an area of approximately six square miles. The city of Flint has a total land area of just over 34 square miles.

Governor's Office Briefing Paper City of Flint Drinking Water Page4

While many of the BWA contributing factors listed above require long-term solutions, the city has taken operational steps to limit the potential for a BWA to reoccur. The city has increased flushing of water mains to limit residence time, maintain disinfectant residual, and help remove buildup and deposits within the piping. The city is boosting chlorine disinfectant residual at locations in the distribution system as needed. The city continues to investigate water leaks and water main breaks and the status and condition of system valves.

Prepared by:

Stephen Busch, P.E. Lansing and Jackson District Supervisor Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance Department of Environmental Quality October 1, 2014

Snyder, Riel< (GOV)
From: Posthumus, Dick (GOV) Tuesday, November 25, 2014 5:05 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV) FW: Flint City Income Tax

Sent:
To:

Subject:

Governor; Have you talked to anybody indicating support of a bill that would allow Flint to increase its Income Tax from 1% to 1.5%? I talked to Dennis and he wasn't sure where you stood on it. And if you support it, do you want us to make it a priority to pass before the end of the year? Dick From: Ackerman, Darin (GOV) Sent: Monday, November 24, 2014 12:49 PM To: Posthumus, Dick (GOV) Subject: Fwd: Flint City Income Tax Just double checking to see if this is your understanding as well. Ananich has asked me about thi s, so I would like to report back to him. Thanks, Darin Ackerman, Deputy Director Legislative Affairs Division Office of Governor Snyder State Capitol Lansing, Ml 48913 Phone: (517) 241-3950 Begin forwarded message: From: "Ryan, Howard (Treasury)" <RyanH1@michigan.gov> Date: November 24, 2014 at 12:30:36 PM EST To: "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" <Posthumusd@michigan.gov> Cc: "Durfee, Sally (GOV)" <durfees@michigan.gov>, "Ackerman, Darin (GOV)" <ackerma nd3@m ich igan.gov> Subject: Flint City Income Tax I'm being told that the Governor has agreed to allow Flint to have a vote t o increase its city income tax from 1.0% to 1.5%. The bill is 4868 and is a Stanley bill. The bill will raise approximately $6.5 million for the city and is a first house biii ........ This is a new priority for us.

1

Snyder. Rick (GOV)
From: Scott, Allison (GOV) Wednesday, December 03, 2014 11:24 AM Snyder, Rick (GOV) FW: Farrington - Flint income tax bill - LUNCHTIME TOPIC

Sent:
To:

Subject:

From: Durfee, Sally (GOV) Sent: Wednesday, December 03, 2014 11:23 AM To: Scott, Allison (GOV) Cc: Posthumus, Dick (GOV) Subject: Farrington - Flint income tax bill Governor, As you know Flint would like to increase its city income t ax from 1.0% to 1.5% - like Grand Rapids and Saginaw. The bill is 4868 and is a Stanley bill. The bill will raise approximately $6.5 million for the city. The Flint EM as well as Saxton over in Treasury support the passage of this bill. Farrington, Chair of House Taxation- said he would take up this bill over his dead body. Then he sa id he would take up if you asked directly. You are having lunch with him today - can you just mention the importance of getting this bill done before we adjourn. Sally

1

Snyder, Riel< (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Subject: Attachments:

Scott, Allison (GOV) Thursday, December 18, 2014 8:43 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV) flint doc from Dennis Flint info.pdf

1

City of Flint
Steps to Prepare for Transition From Emergency Manager to Receivership Transition Advisory Board
Target
Completion

7 Pt. Trans. Pfan #

Comments

* Appoint Selection Committee

* Select finalists

* Recommend Candidate

* Conduct Interviews

* EM Appoints Selected Candidate

9/1/14 10/1/14 11/10/14 11/24/14 12/15/14 12/15/14

12/18/2014 11/4/2014 11/4/2014 11/12/2014 12/1/2014 12/18/2014

City organizational structure

* EM/Mayor recommend Council action
on ordinance changes to implement organizational structure * Council to review and adopt revised organizational structure * Finalization organizational structure roles: Mayor, Council, Administration Complete Bargaining Units Contracts * Local1600 * local1799 * FPOA * PD-Sgts. * PO -Capts & Lts. *Fire Union

5/17/14

5/17/2014

4

6/26/2014 5/17/14 6/26/14 6/26/2014 6/26/2014

4 4 4 4

7/1/14 7/1/14 7/1/14 7/1/14 7/1/14 7/1/14

Ratified Ratified Imposed Ratified Ratified

Revision: 12/17/2014

Pagel

Transition Status Chart 072114

City of Flint
Steps to Prepare for Transition From Emergency Manager to Receivership Transition Advisory Board
Target Comprehensive Public Safety Study * Contract with 1CMA for Study Completion 7 Pt. Trans. Pfan # Comments

4

* Collect Data
*
*
Receive Draft Report

5/9/14-9/30/14 9/30/14

5/8/2014 9/30/2014 11/1/2014

* Receive Final Report
* Plan Implementation
Determine best, most appropriate use of

11/1/14

$1.1 million State Allocation
Retiree Health care Lawsuit

5

* City Notified of lawsuit * Injunction Received * Injunction Modified
Cornerstone determines impact on FY15

1/13/2014 6/30/2014 9/1/14 11/1/14

* & 16 Budget

* Implement Modifications

* Scheduling Conference
*
Mayor and Council to support City's position on retiree health care or adopt measures offsetting increased costs

6/26/14

6/26/2014

5 6

Biennial Budget Implementation

* Biennial Budget Adopted
* 1st Quarter Status
*
2nd Quarter Status

6/26/2014 10/1/14 1/1/15

10/13/2014

FY 14 Budget Close Out

* Preliminary Close * Audit Received

FY14 closed on June 30, 2014

* Audit Presentation to City Council
Revision: 12/17/2014

11/30/14 12/15/14
Page 2

Transition Status Chart 072114

City of Flint
Steps to Prepare for Transition From Emergency Manager to Receivership Transition Advisory Board
Target Governance * EM receives BRC Final Report * Present Report to Mayor and City Council * Mayor and Council Submit Comments to EM * EM Orders BRC Recommended Charter Admendments and Charter Commission Initiative on Nov. Ballot * EM develops proposed governance structure and sends to governor * Mayor and Council Comments on EM Proposal * Define and incorporate financial and organizational best practices Completion 7 Pt. Trans. Plan # Comments

7/18/14 7/28/14 7/28/14

7/18/2014 7/28/14 7/28/14

3

3 Charter Review Cmte. approved by voters 11/4/14 3 Part of Final Order

7/30/14

8/5/ 2014

7/28/14 3/25/ 13

7/28/ 2014 3/25/2014

3 7 Reso on TAB

* EM Submits Plan to Treasury * Treasury Approval Received * EM Orders DE/RAP Adoption
*

7/1/ 14

7/ 1/ 2014 7/ 16/ 2014 7/15/2014 3/25/2014

*

City Council passes resolution of support for DE/RAP Confirmation by Mayor and Council that DE/RAP actions will be a top priority in budgeting

1

Reso on TAB

6/26/14

6/26/ 2014

1

Revision: 12/17/2014

Page3

Transition Status Chart 072114

City of Flint
Steps to Prepare for Transition From Emergency Manager to Receivership Transition Advisory Board
Target
City Counol Activity

Completion

7 pt. Trans. Plan#

Comments

* Council to receive quarterly reports from
Mayor/Fin. Director on progress of achieving strategic objectives and priorities

9/22/14

10/13/2014

6

*
*
Compl etion of City Ordinance Review by Council as proposed by EM Review Strategic Plan, FY16 Budget

9/22/14 1/20/15 1/20/15 2/20/15 2/20/15 3/28/14

3 6/7

* 6 mos. FY15 Budget ReviewI Amendments

6/7
6

* Strategic Plan to be updated annually * FY17 Budget Development
* Completion of MMl Level One Education
Award per

EM Order 2

7 2

Five Year Financial Analysis

* City Council adopts 5 Year Analysis *
Finance/Adm Cmte shall annually review analysis in February each year and Send to Council for approval Issue outgoing EM Order

6/1/14

6/1/2014

2

2/20/15
4/8/2015

2

Rev~on:lZ/17/2014

Page4

Transition Status Chart 072114

~

..-

.:,

7 Point Transition Management Plan
Goal: To provide a strategy for determining and evaluating relevant and spocific criteria for assessing wben the City ofFlint might be prepared to emerge from. Emergency Manager (EM) oversight to a Transition Advisory Board (TAB), as provided in Public Act 436. The seven points identified provide comprehensive and well defined benchmarks to be reviewed before the detemrin.ation is made. The Plan also defines a dab-driven illld measurable process for the objective, results--oriented dctamination of filets. The Plan establishes the criteria now so that it is clear what the conditions are that will have to be satisfied before the Emergency Manager recommends the es:tablishmcm of a Transjtion Advisory Board.
GOAL L Deficit Elimmatil)n Plan

STRATEGY Deficit Elimination Plan and Reserve Accumulation
Plan will be presented by the EM/Mayor/Finance

OBJECTIVES

STATUS

Dir. to City Council thr~ugh its Finance Committee to receive CollllCil support. Also a commitment by the Mayor and Council to implement the plan will be required.

City Council to pass resolution of support for DEPIRAP from EM/Mayor/Fin. Dir. Receive Treasury acceptance of the DEPI.RAP. Confirmation by Mayor and Council that DEPIRAP actiODS will be a top priority in budgeting.

X

X
X

2. Five-Year FiDtneial Analysis

The development, mooitoring and updating of a five· year financial analysis is critical to the ongoing chailenges offinancial solvency. It mnst remain an ongoing process to measure the City's ability to fund services, produce budgets., and proactively manage c:A-penditures. h should be an c:A-pectation ofthe Council that the EM/Mayor/Fin. Dir. shall annually prepare and Council shall rmew and sdopt said projection; and shaD continue to use the projection as a basis for future budgeting actions.

EM/Mayor/Fin. Dir to liiiiiil2lly prepare a 5 yr. RJE projection. CouncilFinance Committee reviewS yr. analysis and move to
Council. City Council adopts 5 Year Analysis. Finance Committee shall annually review analysis in February

X
X X

each year and send to Council for approval.

3. Govern211ct The EM will consider recommendations from the Blue Ribbon Committee, National Civic League Model Chatter, proposed. charter amendments, review of electoral structure, Executive appointments, ere. It is c:A-pected that a formal agreement would be reached among the EM, Mayor, and Council as to what governance revisions are to be implemented, including time frames for implcmCDllltion. Blue Ribbon Cmte. Complete Report and Submit to EM
Mayor and Council Submit Comments on Report to EM EM developes proposed governance structure and sends to Govcmor. Mayor and Council have an oppornmity to rmewand comment on EM proposal. Completion of City Ordinance review by Council as proposed by EM.

X X

X

1.

GOAL
4.. Organizatiou Development

STRATEGY

OBJECTIVES

STATUS

Review the City's QI'ganizational stiUctnre including: Public Safety, ~1-1 plan. courts consolidation plan, recommendations on other longtams~, and role of the city administrator (who will be appointed prior to the TAB). Finalize the QI'ganizational relationship among Mayor, Administration and Council. This will result in an agreed upon ~ed description of the roles and responsibilities ofthe Mayor and Council, including items such as respective roles in strategic plaJJlling. budgeting. monitoring and assessment of results., appointments, and protoCOls for addressing citizen complaints.
5. Legacy Costs

EM/Mayor determines recommended City organizational structure. EM/Mayor to recommend Council aaion (ordinance changes) to implement organizational structure. Council to review and adopt r~ed organizational structure. E.M/Mayor to hire City AdmirustratoriManager. Finalize organization structore and roles: Mayor, Council, Administration. Labor contracts to be completed for all City tmions

X

Retiree Health Care remains the biggest challenge to managing legacy costs and the City is CUiral!Iy facing a legal cballenge. It will be unlikely that the financial emergency will be declared resolved Ull!il this .issne is settled in a manner which does not risk the solvency of the City. Sustaining the changes within RHC are essential to the City's :futore solvency. 6. Strategic Pl2.D The adoption of a long-range stxategic plan by the Emagency Manager, Mayor, and Council for the governing actions of the City will provide a guidance mechanism for determining budgeting, priorities, goals and objectives.

Mayor and Council to support City's position on retiree health

care or adopt mcas= offsetting the increased costs.
Annual bu~oets to include payment ofapproprillle pension and health care costs and liabilities.

EM/Mayor/Fin. Dir. to present 5 yr S1l'lltegic Plan through Finance Cmte. to Council for approval. Council to set spending priorities. EM/Mayor to utilize Strategic Plan'to develop budget. Council to adopt budget in line with Sttategic Plan and bud£et priorities. Council to xeceive qtlllrterly reports from Mayor/Fm. Dir. <~n progress of achieving strategic objectives and priorities. Strategic Plan to be updated annually.

X X X

X

X

2..

-GOAL
7. Sust:tinability

STRAlEGY

OBJECTIVES

STATUS

Factors for determining StlStainability are rooted in the 7 points. More specificaily, the measures that will be evaluated include: achievement of consensus decision-making on the part of the Mayor and the Council, adoption of best practices, continaing commitment to training and development for the Mayor and Council members, ongoing monitoring and updating of plans necessary for the financial stability ofthe City including but not limited to 2· year budgets, 5-year financial analyses, and the ongoing implementation ofthe.M3ster Plan.

Council and Mayor update methods to develop policy recommendations and achieving consensus. Cotmcil and Mayor attend all training sessions as scheduled by

EM
Council and Mayor to actively participare in development and
adoption of 2 yr. budget. Implement Master Plan (evidence of Master Plan implementation in ammal budget). Define and incotporate financial and organizational best

X
X X

practices. Implement system of perfo!DlliOce measurement. Utilize data-driven methods of decision making and pcrfODllallce measuremcrt.

Origination Date: Februwy15. 2014 Revision Date: December 17, 2014

3.

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Subject: Attachments:

Scott, Allison (GOV) Friday, January 16, 2015 11:02 AM Snyder, Rick (GOV) FW: HUD ANNOUNCEMENT- FUNT CN Planning Grant Release-FUNT.docx

fyi
From: Mcbride, Bill ( GOV) Sent: Friday, January 16, 2015 10:58 AM To: Scott, Allison (GOV) Subject: HUD ANNOUNCEMENT-FLINT
Here is what I have found: HUD will announce today that the City of Flint will receive a $500,000 planning grant to help revitalize and transform distressed neighborhoods. Nice to get the grant. MSHDA will be involved in this. No need for the Governor to have been there for announcement or for all the drama involved in getting this information from HUD! http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=FY14PGSummaries.pdf

1

l * ~~~~~~~ :1
~

~~W.ENTot:-

..y

\e.~~~ILol HUD NEWS

EMBARGOED UNTIL 11:30 am ET

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development- Julian Castro, Secretary Office of Public Affairs, Washington, DC 20410
HUDRVNo. OJ Gina Rodriguez (312) 913-8332 I gina.rodriguez@hud.gov http://www.hud.gov/ news/index.cfm FOR RELEASE Friday January 16,2015

HUD AWARDS CHOICE NEIGHBORHOOD GRANT IN FLINT
The City ofFlint and partners will develop transformation plan for South Saginaw
WASHINGTON -Building on a commitment to help local communities redevelop distressed public or assisted housing and transform neighborhoods, U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Secretary Julian Castro announced seven new Choice Neighborhoods Planning Grant awards, including $500,000 to the C ity of Flint. These awards will help grantees craft comprehensive, locally driven plans to revitalize and transform distressed neighborhoods. Part of the Obama Administration's effmt to build Ladders of Oppmtunity to the middle class, HOD's Choice Neighborhoods Initiative promotes a comprehensive approach to transforming neighborhoods struggling to address the interconnected challenges of distressed housing, inadequate schools, poor health, high crime, and lack of capital. Secretary Castro made the announcement at the Louisville Metro Housing Authority, one of the grantees that will use the funding to improve the Russell neighborhood in Louisville, Kentucky. "These Choice Neighborhood grants will spark the creation of community plans for progress," said Castro. "We look fmward to working with local leaders to breathe new life into struggling neighborhoods, transforming them into places where residents can flourish and dreams can thrive." "We are fortunate to have a phenomenal interagency federal partnership through the White House Council on Strong Cities, Strong Communities (SC2) working in lockstep with Fl int to effectuate change in the Atherton East and the South Saginaw CotTidor; The Choice Neighborhood grant will help support our joint-effmts and Transfmmation Plan" said Antonio R. Riley, BUD's Midwest Regional Administrator.

"Decades ago Flint made the mistake of putting its public housing in some of the most isolated parts of the city, and now we're seeing the results - high crime, concentrated poverty, and limited economic opp01tunity. In just the past few weeks, we've seen three murders at Athe1ton East. This grant gives us the opp01tunity to work hand in hand with the Flint Housing Commission and residents to break the cycle and reconnect families to opportunity," said Mayor Dayne Walling. The City of Flint and the Flint Housing Commission are partnering to address the historic challenges facing the Athe1ton East public housing development and the surrounding community. The neighborhood struggles with significant crime. T hese challenges are magnified as the pove1 ty rate is nearly 40 percent. Further, South Saginaw and the City are experiencing a declining population resulting in increased blight and large tracts of vacant land. However, the South Saginaw Corridor also has key assets. The City has recently completed its first master plan since 1960 and has identified the South Saginaw Corridor as a priority area. Created in 20 12, the South Saginaw Task Force has been instrumental in identifying oppmtunities for improvement within the community. The Choice Neighborhoods Transformation Plan will serve as a detailed extension of the recently established City Master Plan. These eff01ts will build on the comprehensive work unde1way through the federal

Strong Cities, Strong Communities initiative - which aims to create new partnerships between federal agencies and localities to spark economic development. Read local summaries of the grants announced today. Choice Neighborhoods is HUD' s signature place-based initiative and its vision builds on the work that has been done by the Neighborhood Revitalization Initiative, an interagency pattnership between HUD, the Depattment of Education, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Justice, and Treasmy, since 2009. Choice Neighborhoods also suppmts the Ladders of Opportunity plan, which will help community partners rebuild neighborhoods, expand early learning oppmtunities, create pathways to jobs, and strengthen families. Choice Neighborhoods is focused on three core goals:
~

Housing: Replace distressed public and assisted housing with high-quality mixed-income housing that is well-managed and responsive to the needs of the surrounding neighborhood. People: Improve educational outcomes and intergenerational mobility for youth with services and suppmts delivered directly to youth and their families. Neighborhood: Create the conditions necessary for public and private reinvestment in distressed neighborhoods to offer the kinds of amenities and assets, including safety, good schools, and commercial activity, that are impmtant to families' choices about their community.

~

~

HUD's commitment to teamwork means local residents and leaders are leading the way in revitalizing their communities. In order to develop a plan that meets the core goals of Choice neighborhoods, broad civic engagement will be needed. Local leaders, residents, and stakeholders, such as public housing authorities, cities, schools, police, business owners, nonprofits, and private developers come together to create a plan that transforms distressed HUD housing and addresses the challenges in the surrounding neighborhood. This Transformation Plan is the guiding document for the revitalization of the public and/or assisted housing units, while simultaneously directing the transformation of the surrounding neighborhood and positive outcomes for families.

###

HUD 's mission is to create strong, sustainable, inclusive communities and quality affordable homes for all. HUD is workh1g to strengthen the housing market to bolster the economy and protect consumers; meet the need for quality affordable rental homes: utilize housing as a platform for improving quality of life; build inclusive and sustainable communities free from discrimination; and transform the way HUD does business. More information about HUD and its programs is available at www.hud.gov and espanol.hud.gov. You can also follotv HUD on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, or sign up for news alerts on HUD 's Email List.

From: Murray, David (GOV) Sent: Sunday, February 01, 2015 5:15 PM To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Snyder, Rick (G <Wurfe ls@michigan.gov>; Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov> Subject: Background information and draft press releases for Tueday water event in Flint Good afternoon Governor,

urfel, Sara (GOV)

Here is background on th e planned Tuesday event in Flint regarding the $2 million Distressed Cities grant and other issues connected to the water situation . There are plans for two press re leases on Tuesday. The first w ill detail the two Flint.grants and w ill be released by t he governor's comm unications office. The other release, which would detail t he other grants, would fo llow from Treasury with a quote. Both drafts are attached, and we are considering approaching t he Flint mayor or emergency manager to contribute a quote. Mayor Walling has agreed to speak at the event, w ith Harvey Hollins and Dan Wyant re presenting the administration. Sen. Ananich has asked to speak, and it has been suggested that Rep. Neeley would speak and it might be better to add him to the program. others, such as Deputy Director Workman and Emergency Manager Ambrose, would be present and available. The attached document includes details about th e planned event, as well as background on the grants from Treasury and on the entire water issue from DEQ as well as M ayor Walling's Facebook post and links to t he stories in the media about the issue. We have a room reserved and are working with the communications team in Flint to have microphones and other items needed f or t he event. Please let me know If there is any information yo u think should also be included, or anything that shou ld be changed. Thank you very much, Dave Murray

Dave Murray Deputy Press Secretary I Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder MurrayDl @mlchlgan.gov

iiiiiiiiiiliii.

1

Twitter:@mlchlgandmurray

2

Briefing: Grant announcement in Flint Tuesday, Feb. 3, 2015, 3-4 p.m. Haskell Community Center, 2201 Forest Hills Ave. Flint Governor's communications: Dave Murray, !.!!..:::.!..!..:::..z..:::.=~:::="-':':'-== DEQ communications: Brad Wurfel, wurfelb@michigan.gov, Treasury communications: Terry Stanton, stantont@michlgan.gov, Purpose The state government is providing support for the Flint government as it addresses issues with its water system. The state on Tuesday is announcing that Flint is receiving two grants totaling $2 million related to water system improvements through the Financially Distressed Cities, Villages and Townships grant program. DEQ Director Dan Wyant will address ongoing efforts with his agency to test Flint water and explain why the city is facing some of its problems. Senate Minority Leader Jim Ananich, D-Fiint, will discuss his appreciation for the ongoing support for the city and its residents. Attending · · · · · · · · Agenda 3:00 PM- 3:05 PM: 3:05 PM -3:10 PM: 3:10 PM - 3:15 PM: 3:15 PM- 3:20 PM: 3:20 PM- 3:25 PM: 3:25 PM-3:35PM: 3:35PM Background · The quality of Flint water has been a high-profile concern in recent weeks, with residents complaining about the color, taste and smell of tap water since a switch to Flint River water as a temporary source as a pipeline is built to Lake Huron as a water source starting in 2016. o Residents have attended meetings with jugs of brownish water. o U.S. l<ildee has worked with labor and community groups to distribute bottled water. Harvey Hollins announces that Flint has received two grants totaling $2 million. Dan Wyant discusses the state's ongoing role in monitoring Flint's water and any assistance that has been provided and will continue to be provided . .Mayor Dayne Walling remarks about appreciation for state assistance. Sen. Jim Ananich remarks about appreciation for state assistance. Rep. Neeley rem arks. Harvey Hollins closing remarks, opens floor to media questions. Event ends, though this might be optimistic. Harvey Hollins, director of the Michigan Office of Urban Initiatives Dan Wyant, director of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Wayn e Workman, deputy treasurer, Michigan Department ofTreasury Jerry Ambrose, Flint emergency manager Dayne Walling, Flint mayor State Sen . Jim Ananich State Rep. Sheldon Neeley State Rep. Phil Phelps

II

Mayor Walling has issued a letter (included below) calling for state and federal assistance for the city, including forgiveness of some $20 million in debt through the Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund and calling for the governor to come to Flint personally. o Walling also submitted a guest column to the Flint Journal w ith similar requests. · He said the loan forgiveness is needed for the city to upgrade· its water treatment process. o Governor and Mayor Walling had a telephone conversation on Friday, and the mayor has pledged to work together on solutions. Rep. Sheldon Neeley also has sent the governor a letter, saying that his constituents 11 are on the verge of civil unrest." The Department of Environmental Quality has been monitoring the water situation, with a detailed backgrounder and talking points attached below. The Treasury Department is announcing Tuesday that Flint is among the cities receiving a combined $8 million the Financially Distressed Cities, Villages and Townships grant program. o The announcement of the other grants will follow the Flint announcement. · The Flint grants are $1.1 million to allow the city to replace the functions of the old incinerator w ith new water pollution control facility allowing for the disposal of waste to landfills. · The other is $900,000 to allow the city to hire a contractor to perform a leak detection survey, which will lead to prioritizing repairs. o A breakdown of the grants is included below.

·

·

·

Treasury breakdown of Flint grants Flint Incinerator: The grant project entails shutting down the current Water Pollution Control Facility Incinerator (due to the incinerate~ not being up to new EPA standards). In order to meet EPA standards, it would cost roughly $8.8M in upgrades to the current incinerator. The grant funding will allow them to repla ce the functions of the old incinerator by constructing new facilities wh ich will allow for the disposal of waste to landfills. Budget Breakdown Construction Contractor Project M anagement Total

$1,050,000
$50,000

$1,100,000

Flint Leak Detection: The grant project will allow the city to hire a co ntractor to perform a leak detection survey of the city water lines. The city wil l receive a map of leak locations and an assessment of leak severity. This data will allow t he city t o priori~ize leak repair. The project also covers the expense of conducting a water pipe line w_all thickness condition assessment on a portion of the city's pipes. The assessment will guide the city's water main replacement program. Budget Breakdown Project Planning Mobilization of Crew to Site Leak Detection < 16" diameter

$90,000
$27,000 $378,000

Leak Detection 16" diamet er or > Pipe Condition Assessments Total DEQ baclcgrounder on Flint water

$270,000 $135,000 $900,000

Following the formal approval of Flint into the KWA in 2012, DWSD sent Flint a letter saying their contract was t hereby terminated (by early 2013). Genesee County has been using DWSD water w ithout a contract since May 2014. But Flint took the letter to imp ly a water cutoff, and prompt ly turned to DEQ with a proposal to use the Flint River (their historic backup syst em). This proposed shift was pitched primarily as a mo ney saver. But it put the city in t he business of water production, where they historically had been in the business of water transmission. DEQ approved the use of the river as a source, based on th e treatment plant's past performa nce as a standby f acility and the improvements we outlined prior to a switchover. Several municipa lities around the state use surface water supplies (rivers): Blissfield near Monroe, Manistique, and Alma to name a f ew. The city completed t he upgrades at th e water plant the facilit y and DEQ approved it April 2014. There were some initial hiccups. Last summer, there were a couple of 'boil water' notices issued. One for a water test that showed e. coli, one for a break in the water main. Th e challenge to using the Flint River as a source is t hat the condition of the water Is variable and changes with season and weather. It has substant ially more organic matter than deep lake sources like Lake Huron. This organic matter is mobilized by high water events, and warm weather also can account for more organic materia l in the water. The t reatment of the organic matter is done with chlorine. One might conclude that t he continua l answer is just to use more chlorine to achieve wat er safety. Howeve r, at some point on th e continuum, the chlorine and organic matter create TTHM - total trih alomethanes- as a byproduct. When the standard for those is exceeded over several consecutive quarters of testing, the supply is required by law to issue public notice and submit an approved plan for addressing the situation. You'll note that this regulatory approach mea ns TTHM testing is done quarterly. That means people who use the syst em are exposed to TIHM for several months before t he public notice is requ ired. It's because TTHM is a chronic health threat. Ove r the long term (measured in decades), continued exposure can contribute to some known hea lth problems. If this were an immediat e health threat, customers would receive immediate notification to boil their w at er or not use it. Put in co ntext , the EPA (w hich established the sta ndard and the rul e) estimates the existence of the TIHM standard prevents an estimated 280 bladde r cancer cases each year ... out of more t han 330 million people who use public water supplies around the co untry. It's not "nothing." State and federal law requires quarterly testing f or TTHM and that th e public be inform ed of it when the annual average of fou r quarters' worth of consecutive testing shows TIHM .

levels exceeding 80 parts per billion . Flint's results managed to exceed the annual average in three quarters, and they must develop a plan to address it. But it's not like an eminent threat t o public health. Unlike an e. Coli or eve n t otal coliform bacteria maximum contaminant level, which require immediate public notificat ion and response and are part of daily I hou rly testing of public water supplies, TIHMs pose a public health concern wit h chronic, longterm exposure. It's clear t he nature of the threat was communicated poorly. It's also clear that folks in Flint are concerned about other aspects of their water - taste, smell and color being among the t op complaints. The Safe Drinking Water Act requires public water supplies be tested for more than 90 regu lated contaminants, including microbial contaminants. The act, and the program here in Michigan, wo rk to ensure that water is safe to drink. The act does not regulate aesthetic values of water. Here are some factors affecting the aesthetics of wat er in Flint. It's the Flint River. The water supplied by DWSD historically came from Lake Huron. It's softer. With hard water, you get a different flavor and feel. It's why General Motors suspended use of Flint Water- it was rusti ng their parts. Also, there's the 'orga nics' f actor (discussed previously). 2. The syst em is old . Flint has more than 500 miles of water pipes. More than half of those pipe miles are more th an 75 years old. Much of it is cast iron. Hard water can react with cast iron and exace rbates the rusty factor, w hich creates that brown water that angry residents we re hold ing up in jugs for the media ca meras last week. Valve failure has also been a key challenge. The system has an estimated 7,500+ valves. When they stick open or stick shut, it affects the hydraulics ofthe system and increase areas of stagnation. The city has a backlog of valves that need to be add ressed. They've done half a dozen or so since November. 3. Flint is old. Many of the homes served by the system are old. Brown water complaints may also be attributabl e to cast Iron pipes in customers' service connection to t he city lines. The DEQ has been encouraging people with water coloration con cerns to contact the city and see whether it is the service line or the City's line causing th e issue. Again, discoloration is not an indicator of water quality or water safety, but we recognize th at nobody likes it. In summary, th e City of Flint has tremendous need t o address Its water delivery system. We are not aw are th at t hey have any capital improvement funds for preventative maintenance in place, much less line replacement project monies that w ill require hundreds of millions. The City was approved for a Revolving Fund loan in 2008 or 2009. As a Distressed Community, t hey qualified for flexible t erm s and 2 percent interest rate Revolving Fund Loan. After t hey were notified they were approved for the loan, t hey declined it. Previous SRF loans from the stat e to Flint bear an outstanding balance of $20.7 million t oday. The DEQ continues working with the city to address the TIHM issue. They can take interim steps- from scrubbing the insides oftransmission li nes t o carefully monitoring the hydraulic challenges in their system - to address customers' aesth~tic concerns. Their TIHM numbers already are .showing dramatic improvement; the Novem ber t esting showed only one of seven sample points exceeding t he standard. The l<ey now is t hat th e standard is an average of three quarters' w orth of results. It will be some time before th ey are officially " not in violation." However, depending on weather in 2015, it ' s not unforeseeable that we will be having th is conversation again by next Christmas. 1.

The key to the conversation is that TIHM is not a top henlth concern. That's key because residents need to understand TTHM in context, and it is i<ey because it appears the mayor has seized on the public panic (sparked, frankly, by their poor communication of the violation notice) to ask the state for loan forgiveness and more money for their infrastructure improvement. Another key thing to remember is that once the city connects to the new I<WA system in 2016, this issue will fade in the rearview.

I<ev messages:
1. 2. 3. 4. The DEQ Drinking Water program works with communities around the state to ensure t hat municipalities provide customers with clean, safe drinking water. · Municipal water supplies are tested rigorous.ly and regu larly for more than 90 regulated contaminants, including microbial contaminants that pose an immediate public health concern. Flint's exceedance of the TIHM standard should reassure residents that the testing program is effective. TIHM is not an immediate health threat. It is a chronic concern, one that can be problematic over the course of severa l decades of exposure. The public was notified because the law requ ires the city to make public notification, so that everyone can make informed decisions. This is particularly true for people with infants or those with compromised immune systems. The DEQ Is working with the City to address the situation. Recent tests show the TIHM numbers dropping rapid ly. The department will continue working with the city in the months ahead, and residents should feel confident that their water is safe to drink unless the DEQ or City notifies them otherwise. The discoloration and odor issues some Flint residents are experiencing are separate issues from the TIHM issue. TTHM is odorless, colorless and measured in parts per billion. Flint water customers who have questions or concerns about their water should first contact the city to get answers and help. They also can contact the Michigan DEQ.

5.

6. 7.

Mayo r Walling's Facebool< post
Friend, Access to clean, safe, affordable water is a basic human right. That's why I just sent Gov. Snyder my Flint Water improvement Plan. It focuses on the areas of safety, quality, access, investment and education. My letter urges the governor to quickly implement these ideas so that Flint's water is 100% safe. Please contact Gov. Snyder by calling (517) 335-6397 (or by clicking here) and ask him to take action immediately to implement my plan and ensure Flint's water is safe. My plan offers new ideas and also builds on successful models of utility, energy and assistance programs at the state and federal levels. Here is my plan: Safety & Quality · 100% Safety is the standard

" ·

· · Access · Announce an amnesty program for turn-ons and reduce the turn-on cost in Flint Develop a revised payment plan policy to allow c ustomers to come back on to the Flint system · · New Federal and State partnership to establish new Drinking Water Emergency Assistance Fund for cust omers (modeled on Federal and State energy utility programs: Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program; Michigan Energy Assistance Program; State Emergency Relief) Investment · Accelerate water system improvements outlined in the City of Flint Capital Improvement Plan through Federal and State Investments · · State approves City of Flint's Distressed Cities Fund applications Federal and Stat e forgiveness of payment to Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund · · Federal and State financing for future improvements · City Water Department imp lements budgeted FY15 projects including leak detection, valve repairs, new pipes and meter replacements Education · Develop a community partnership to provide household and business cust omers with information on testing and conservation · Ongoing partnership with M ichigan Department of Human Services, United Way, Salvation Army and community organizations to provide information on wate r assistance · Expand youth energy initiative to assist households with conservation and efficiency (piloted in summer 2014 with Northwestern High School stud ents, EcoWorks and Consumers Energy) The struggle with our water has gone on for too long. The state must t ake action and do its part. Please ask Gov. Snyder to take action immediately to implement my plan and ensure Flint's water is safe. Thank you for your ongoing support. Links to coverage · · · · · · · · · · Mayor, governor have 'long, productive' talk about Flint's water problems, Jan . 30 2,000 more gallons of water headed to Flint for giveaway, Jan. 30, 2015 Flint emergency manager says there are two big reasons not to reconnect Detroit water, Jan. 29 Flint Democracy Defense League plans four meetings on city's water problems, Jan. 29 Environmentalist sends out new warnings about Flint water, NBC, Jan. 27 Erin Brockovlch says on Facebool< she's prepared to come to Flint. Mlive, Jan. 27 Mott Community College not waiting for Flint to ensure safe water, Mlive, Jan. 26 Detroit water chief says she's willing to sell emergency water to Flint-- no strings attached, Jan. 26 Mayor says governor needs to visit Flint to see water crisis first hand, Mlive, Jan. 26 Need water? Flint groups collect 600 cases, plan distribution this week, Mlive, Jan. 26

City of Flint releases testing data to assure safety and expands testing to households with support from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Support alternatives for those advised not to drink the water by their doctors through the Michigan Health Endowment Fund and community partners to protect the vulnerable like seniors and infants Bring on experienced river water treatment operational management in the City of Flint Require water testing data to be released quarterly by law in all Michigan communities

Iii

Incoming Flint water expert would have 'continual oversight' until new pipeline connected, Jan.
25

II

·· · ·

Looking back at Flint's water problems (photo gallery), Mlive, Jan. 25 Flint water problems: Switch aimed to save $5 million-- but at what cost?, Mlive, Jan. 23 State says its already 'working diligently' on Flint's water problems, Mlive, Jan. 22 Officials say Flint water is getting better, but many residents unsatisfied, Mlive, Jan. 21

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Cc:
Subject:

Snyder, Rick (GOV) Thursday, April 30, 2015 5:43 PM Calley, Brian (GOV) Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Agen, Jan·od (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) Re: City of Flint Mayor issue

May want to consider giving this issue to Ananich. Thanks Rick Sent from my iPad >On Apr 30, 2015, at 5:41PM, Calley, Brian {GOV) > >This is a big enough problem that we might want to consider changing state law- at least to allow for a primary election for write-ins. Too much progress has been made in Flint to let it go to this guy. > >

>
»On Apr 30, 2015, at 5:28PM, Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov> wrote: >> >> Governor, >> »Mike Senyko from Ruth Johnson's office just called me to let me know of a f iling deadline issue in the city of Flint. The city clerk erroneously informed candidates that the filing dead line for the mayoral election was April 28th when it was actually the 21st. Mayor Dayne Walling filed on the 28th and will therefore not be on the ballot. Eric Mays, the Flint city councilman who was jailed last year and has been very problematic to both our EM and secure cities efforts, is the only candidate who filed by the April 21st deadline. Mike Senyko indicated that since there is only one candidate on the ballot, there will not be a primary election that Mayor Walling can do a write in campaign for so his only option is a write in campaign for the general. Mike was not sure if Mayor Walling had been informed yet but he expects the news to break this evening. There is no provision in state law that allows for a situation like this to be rectified. Please let me know if you have any questions. >> »Thanks, >> »Beth >> >> >>

1

Snyder, Riel< (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Cc: Subject:

Snyder, Rick (GOV) Thursday, June 11, 2015 8:33 AM Etue, Kriste (MS P ) Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) Re: MSP bike patrols make their debut in Flint this week

Glad to see it. Good work. Let me know how things are going in the our cities. Hopefully, we won't have significant summer issues. Also, thanks for the good work with the sexual assault summit. Seemed to go very well. Thanks Rick Sent from my iPad >On Jun 10, 2015, at 9:46 PM, Etue, Kriste (MSP) <EtueK@michigan.gov> wrote:

>
>Governor:

>
> I think you will like thi s new approach for the summer ... > > http://www.a bc12 .com/home/head Ii nes/Bike-patro Is-make-their-de but-i n-Fii nt-this-week306705041.html?device=phone&c=y >

>
>Sent from my iPhone

1

-----Original Message----From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) Sent: Saturday, Septem To: Snyder, Rick ( Cc: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@m n.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth {GOV) <clemente @michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod {GOV) <AgenJ@ michigan.gov>; Clayton, Stacie (GOV) .<clayton s3@michigan.gov> Subject: Re: Flint Water Filters Governor, it went over extremely well with the residents. There is a demand for more. Best, Harvey >On Sep 5, 2015, at 2:00PM, Snyder, Rick ( rote:

>
> Factually accurate update; but how did it go over with t he residents?

>
>Thanks >Rick

>
»On Sep 2, 2015, at 3:13 PM, Hollins, Harvey {GOV) <hollinsh @michigan .gov> wrote:

»
»As you kno~ donated 1500 kitchen water filters for Flint res idents as a way of providing added o not want any publicity or credit for the comfort amid concerns about Flmt's water qua lity donation.

»
» The filters were delivered to the Concerned Pastors organization, who held an event yesterday to give away the filters. Residents were invited t o come to a central location to pick up their filter. The Concerned Pastors targeted low income Flint residents.

»
»More than 1500 households showed up yesterday to pick up a filter; the Concerned Pastors exhausted the donated supply in 4 hours with 200 people still waiting to get a filter.

»
» Best, » Harvey

>

1

-----Original Message----From: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Sent: Saturday, September 05, 2015 2:00PM To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <holl insh@michigan.gov> Cc: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@mich igan.gov>; Clayton, Stacie (GOV) <claytons3@michigan.gov> · Subject: Re: Fli nt Water Filters Factually accurate update; but how did it go over with the residents? Thanks Rick >On Sep 2, 2015, at 3:13 PM, Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov> wrote:

>
>As you l<now,~onated 1500 kitchen water filters for Flint residents as a way of providing added comfort amid concerns about Flint's water quality. not want any publicity or credit for the don<ltion .

>
> The filters were delivered to the Concerned Pastors organization, who held an event yesterday to give away the fi lters. Residents were invited to come to a central location to pick up their filter. The Concerned Pastors targeted low income Flint residents.

>
>More than 1500 households showed up yesterday to pick up a fi lter; the Concerned Pastors exhausted the donated supply in 4 hours with 200 people still waiting to get a filter.

>
>Best, > Harvey

1

Scott, Allison {GOV)
From: Sent: To:
Cc: Cline, Richard (Treasury) Wednesday, September 16, 2015 3:13PM Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) Dempkowski, Angela {Treasury) Updated Summary of September 15 Conference Call Summary of September 15 Conference Call.docx; Utilities Update 9_16_15-2.pdf High

Subject: Attachments: Importance:

Tom/Wayne: Attached, per your request, is an updated summary ofthe September 15 call with the City of Flint plus an update on utility upgrades, provided by the City. If you need anything further, let me know.

Eric Cline I Department Manager State of Michigan 1 Michigan Department of Treasury 1 Office of Fiscal Responsibility 430 W.lillegan Street, 3rd Floor Lansing, MI 48922 City Office (231) 922-5228 Lansing Office (517) 335-2078 I E-mail cliner l@michigan.gov
CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, and ;wy attacl!ments, is for the sole use of tl1e intended recipient(s) and may contain infonnatio11 that is confidential and protected fmm disclosure u11der the Jaw. Any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, or disfl·ibution is pmllibiled.l!y ou are not the ill tended l'ecipienf, please contact the sender by reply e-mail, and delete/destroy all copies of the original m essage and attachments Thank you.

1

City of Flint Water Quality Update Wednesday September 16TH, 2015 GAC Installation
What: $1,601,740 contract with LAN to design and install new fi lter media at the Water Plant Status: Complete

Leak Detection
What: $900,000 Treasury Distressed Citv Grant for Leak Detection I Pipe Wall Assessment Status : In Progress The vendor "echologics" is nearly 1/3 complete with the leak detection

WPC Incinerator Shutdown
What: $1,100,000 Treasury Distressed Citv Grant for WPC Incinerator Shutdown Status: In construction phase The walls are nearly done being erected. Next steps: Construction of the walls.

Water Meter Installation What: $5,000,000 contract to purchase and install up to 18,000 water meters. Status: In progress The vendor has established a good routine and has installed approximately 3000 of the targeted 9000 meters have been installed Installers are facing more resistance from customers about the change outs ~300 people are refusing the installation. Small jumpers were added to the installation to protect plastic meters going in place of metal to protect electronics within the household. The main focus of this contract was the $2,500,000 on the front end to complete the targeted 9000 meter installation . This was an FY15 expenditure. Next steps: Continue with the progress.

Summary: Conference Call with City of Flint September 15, 2015

Participating: Tom Saxton, Wayne Worlanan, Fred Headen, Eric Cline, Mayor Walling, City Administrator Natasha Henderson, Finance Director Jody Lundquist, City Attorney Pete Bade, Assistant City Attorney Tony Chubb

·

The City of Flint is involved in two lawsuits regarding water and sewer rates: Kincaid and Shears. o It was stTessed that the Shears and Kincaid lawsuits are both separate but are being litigated concurrently and that any developments mutually impact both suits.

·

It was noted that in the opinion of the City, both cases will continue to be litigated for some time due to the complexity of the issues involved.

·

In a related matter, the City Attorney noted that the Water Coalition lawsuit to force the City to
purchase water from the City of Detroit was dismissed in Genesee County Circuit Comt.

Shears Lawsuit
· Shears was decided by the Genesee County Circuit Comt by a non-final order on August 17, 2015.
o Among other things, the Court enjoined City officials from any longer imposing a 3 5 percent increase in water and sewer rates; fi:om disconnecting water or sewer service due to delinquent bills, dating back to September 16, 2011; and fi·om placing liens on property due to delinquent bills, dating back to September 16, 2011. City officials have filed an appeal with the Michigan Comt of Appeals seeking, an1ong other things, a stay of the Genesee County Circuit Comt injunction.

o

o In the interim, City officials are complying with the Comt's order in Shears. · The City's appeal is still being considered by the Comt. No timeline for a decision is known.

Kincaid Lawsuit
· Kincaid was decided by the Michigan Comt of Appeals on June 11, 2015.
o The Comt held that a 35 percent increase in water and sewer rates imposed by City officials on September 16, 2011, violated the City charter and that Emergency Manager Mike Brown had no statutory authority to later ratify those rate increases in May of2012. o o · The Court of Appeals remanded the case to Genesee County Circuit Court. City officials intended to appeal this decision to the Michigan Supreme Couti, but missed the filing deadline by one day.

The City Attorney stated that litigation of this case must continue because some key issues have yet to be resolved, including: o o The exact damages have not been clarified. The issue of who has standing in this case remains umesolved.

Summa1·y: Conference Call with City ofFlint September 15, 2015 Financial Impacts
· City officials estimate that nullification of the 35 percent increase in water and sewer rates is costing approximately $600K/month. Therefore, if the Comi orders either refunds or credits against future water and sewer bills retroactive to September 16, 2011, the cost is estimated to be approximately $30M. o The Finance Director noted that since September 2011, the system has had a declining number of users, so the total potential refund is higher than basing calculations from the cun·ent number of users. The City Administrator stated that the City has not developed a plan to issue a refund of this size because the City lacks sufficient funds to do so and they would be unable to operate at this point.

o

·

The City Administrator noted that citizens are paying the latest monthly billing but that the City must contend with lower revenues for the foreseeable future.

·
·

In addition, it was noted that if the City has to refund the Ready-to-Serve charge from September
2011 through July 1, 2015, that this amount is approximately $10M.

It was noted that the amotmt of delinquent funds owed to the City that are over 30 days old has grown :fi·om $7.8M to $8.4M since the mling in the Shears Lawsuit.
o Fmther, the City Administrator stated that because the City is prohibited from shutting off service for non-payment, the amount of delinquent funds is expected to continue to grow.

·

In addition, the City Administrator noted that the measures taken to reserve funds within the system to address the financial issues has delayed needed capital improvements, which further exacerbates the problems within the system, but the City cannot address these capital needs without additional !·! revenue.
The City Administrator further stressed the impmiance of the State assistance sought by the Mayor in his September 14, 2015, letter to the Governor. o The Mayor requested $30M for infrastructure and capital impmvements related to the City's water and sewe1· system. o It was stressed by Treasmy that existing funding options were very limited and we were not aware of anything short of a legislative appropriation. · · · · State funding ofthe City's $30M request will likely invite requests from many other communities with similar needs. The State recently awarded the City $2M in Distressed Cities grant funds to implement improvements to their system. The State further provided the City with an additional $2M in relief for outstanding SRF/DWRF loans. Treasury is npt aware of any cunent Flint projects related to their water quality issues that could be fimded through the DWRF program and DEQ is responsible for managing DWRF eligible projects.

·

-----Original Message----From : Muchmore, Dennis {GOV) Sent: Friday, September 25, 2015 10:29 AM lley, Brian {G To: Snyder, Riel< {GOV) Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod ( Subject: Flint water The issue of Flint water and its quality continues to be a challenging topic. The switch over to use Flint river wat er has spurred most of the controversy and contention. The DEQ and DCH fee l that some in Flint are taking t he very sensitive issue of chil dren's exposure t o lead and trying to turn it into a political footba ll claiming the departments are underestimating the impacts on the populations and particularly trying t o shift responsibility t o the state. We have put an incredible amount of t ime and effort Into this issue because of the impacted neighbors and their children, and the I<WA/DWSD controversy and Dillon's involvement in the f inal decision . Kildee is asking for a call with you. That's tricky because he's sure to use it publicly, but if you don't tall< with him it w ill j ust fan the narrative that the state is ducking responsibility. I can't figure out w hy t he state is responsible except that Dillon did mai<e the ult imate decision so we're not able to avoid th e subject. The real responsibility rests with the County, city and I<WA, but since the issue here is th e health of citizens and their children w e're takin g a pro-active approach putting DHHS out th ere as an educat or. I'm not sure how much background you need on all this so I do.n't want to flood you with st uff. Jarrod and Dave have a lot of info that we can supplement your understanding and we can put a briefing or face to face wit h Wyant and Lyon if you want to go there. Sent from my iPhone

1

-----0 rigi na I Message----From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Sent: Friday, September 25, 2015 8:47 PM To: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Mcbride, Bill (GOV) <mcbrideb@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth <c (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) <emmittb@michigan.gov> Subject: Re: Flint water

We're collecting the information tonight and will send tomorrow. Sent from my iPhone > On Sep 25, 2015, at 3:44PM, Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michlgan.gov> w rote:

>
>governor spoke with Ananich this afternoon

>
>He would like to do a call Monday morning with Dennis and Dan Wyant to get latest and greatest info on this t opic

>
>After that w ill be some combination of he and Wyant speaking with Ananich

>
>Any materials on this topic please share for over the weekend

>
> Beth please use call time mom for this purpose. This should precede the l<ildee call as well

>
> Thanks

>
> Sent from my iPhone

1

O'·

O, . . .

ooO o

''

O

Oo O

O

oO

O

O

O

'',

ooO O

oO o

O o

OoOoo ..

0

00

'

0

oooo

' ' " ' ' '' ' ' '

0

0

00 0

O

o

O

00

'0

0

000

00

0000oOOO··

·

·

·

·

0

°

0

°01

0

00

0

0

.. 0 .. M

0

0

o

0

00

OoO

0

0

'00

0

0

0

00

00

0 ' 0 0 _ ... , , ,

oo O

ooo

oooO

From: Muchmore, Dennis {GOV) Sent: Saturday, September 26, 2015 9:26AM To: Snyde r, Rick (GOV -----Cc: Calley, Brian (GOV ott, Allison {GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey {GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth {GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Wa lsh, John {GOV) <Wa lshJ@michigan.gov>; Posthumus, Dick {GOV) <Posthumusd@michigan.gov>; Forstner, Nathaniel {GOV) <forstn ernl@michigan.gov> Subject: Flint updates The memo and attachments below have captured t he latest information from the departmental side on Flint succinctly. Kildee is engaged in his norma l press hound routine, which is unfortunate because he's rea lly a smart, talented guy who needs to roll up his sleeves while Anan ich is looking for relief but doesn't know where it would come from and as usua l is a positive force. Frankly, I think both know th at Walling went out on CYA effort due to the election, but of course can't say so. Neither has any idea where his $30M figure came from, or where we wou ld get it even if you were so inclined. Origina lly the thrust for the KWA came from th e Genesee County commission and t hose involved in t he planning for KWA including the Trades. By the time the council had voted 7- 1 for it, Andy Dillon was in t he position of signing off on it and did. However, it was still the right position for the long term benefit of the city and its future. They of course have not been particularly helpful in find ing solutions to the issues. I will say that the Drain Commissioner has been a good partner and is working overtime on the problem. They can't reconnect to DWSD even if they wanted to as they sold the connector line. And, especially with the new rate increases in Detroit, th eir citizens would be less able to pay than t hey already are. The wa ter certainly has occasiona l less than savory aspects li ke color beca use of the apparently more corrosive aspects of the hard water coming from the river, but that has died down with the additional main filters. Taste and smell have been problems also and substantial money has been extended to work on those issues. Now we have the ant i everything group turning to the lead content which is a concern for everyone, but DEQ and DHHS and EPA can't find evidence of a major change per Geralyn's memo below. Of course, some of the Flint people respond by looking for someone to blame instead of working to r ed uce anxiety. We can 't tolerate increased lead levels in any event, but it's rea lly the city's water system that needs to deal with it. We're throwing as much assistance as possible at the lead problem as regardless of what the levels, explanations o r proposed solutions, the residents and particularly the poor need he lp to deal with it. It seems that continuing to find funds to buy local residents home filters is really a viable option and Harvey and all are pursuing more assistance in that work. Almost all the "experts" I've talked to are convinced the problem is in the old

1

lines leading to homes and short of a massive replacem ent CSO type bond that wou ldn't resolve the issue fo r a couple of years, nature {temp reductions), fi lters and a final connect seem to be the best courses of action. The residents are caught in a swirl of misinformation and l ong term distrust of local government unlikely to be resolved. Sent from my !Phone Begin f orwa rded message: From: " Lasher, Geralyn {DCH)" <lasherg@michigan.gov> Date: September 25, 2015 at 4:47:01 PM EDT To: "Muchmore, Dennis {GOV)" <muchmored@michigan.gov>, "Clement, Elizabeth {GOV)" <clemente@michigan.gov>, "Lyon, Nick (DCH)" <LyonN2@mlchigan.gov>, "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" <WyantD@michigan.gov> Cc: "Wurfel, Brad (DEQ)" <WurfeiB@michigan.gov>, "Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV)" <wisniewskiw@michigan.gov>, "Grijalva, Nancy (DCH)" <GriialvaN@michigan.gov>, "Hertel, Elizabeth (DCH)" <HerteiE@michigan.gov> Subject: Update Quick recap on the interactions this week from the MDHHS side on the Flint water issue. Today the City of Flint issued t he attached "Lead Advisory" for res idents to be aware of lead levels in drinking water and issued suggestions from the Genesee County Health Department as to what residents could do to reduce risk. These include: --flushing cold-water pipes by running water fo r approximate ly 5 min utes, --using only water from the cold-water tap for drinking, cooking and making baby f ormula --installing a waterfilter that is NSF-certified f or lead removal. We worked with the Genesee County Healt h Department t hroughout t he w eek to get them in a more pro-t~ctive mode to provide t his guida nce publicly and to encourage citizens to have the City test their water if they were concerned about the quality of water at their home. The health department also issued this fact sheet http://www.gchd.us/docs/Popular Pages/GCHD Lead in- Water Fact Sheet 2 .pdf on Thursday providing additional info rmatio n on the issue. MDHHS epidemiologists continue to review the "data" provided by a Hurley hospital physician that showed an increase in lead activity following the change in water supp ly . While we continue t o review this dat a, we have stated publicly th at Hurley conducted their analysis in a much different way t han we do at the department. Hu rley used two partial years of data, MDHHS looked at five comprehensive years and saw no increase outside t he normal seasonal increases. The Hu rley review was also a much smaller sample than M DHHS data as ours includes all hosp ital systems in Flint as well as outside laboratories. We have also provide t he attached data chart that outlines if t he elevated blood lead levels w ere being driven by a change in water, we would have seen t he elevated levels re main high after the change in water source. We have also communicated that f or WIC beneficiaries in Flint with documentation of unsan itary water, t hey may be able to receive ready to feed formu la and have encouraged families to contact WIC t o see if they are eligible for this formula. SNAP beneficiaries are able to purchase bottled water with their SNAP f unds.
2

Talking points from MDHHS are attached as well. Thank you, G

3

. : Da,vpe~4illll~gr
·Mayor·

· ''"-a~siaa·.:~ H~ndersq'n
CitY1Adinh11strator·

For Immediate Release

Jason Lorenz Public Information Officer Office: (81 0) 237 "2039 Cell: (810) 875-2576 jlorenz@cltvofflint.com

City of Flint Issues Lead Advisory
Flint, Michigan- September 25, 2015- The City of Flint is issuing a Lead Advisory for

residents to be aware of lead levels in drinking water after hearing concerns from the medical community. While the City is in full compliance with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, this information is being shared as part of a public awareness campaign to ensure that everyone takes note that no level of lead is considered safe. The Genesee County Health Department has issued a fact sheet regarding lead precautions for residents. The fact sheet can be found on their website at www.gchd.us. Here are a few of the suggestions the Health Department recommends: · · Flush your cold-water pipes by running the water for approximately 5 minutes Use only water from the cold-water tap for drinking, cooking, and especially for making baby formu la. · Install a water filter that is NSF-certified for lead removal.

Lead contamination can leach into water from a home's lead water service lines, lead solder, and leaded plumbing materials including fixtures, faucets, and fittings. Older service lines with pipes and fixtures installed before 1986 can sometimes be more susceptible to lead issues due to materials used in the home such as lead based paint and lead pipes. This message is meant as a precaution to residents and does not mean that all homes in the City will experience th e same issue. Residents with concerns about lead service lines City Hall
1101 S. Snginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-72 18 www.cityofflint.com

D~n~Walling
Max.or.

Ni{tash·a,l.!:l Hen~er'!on
~ity' Adinfntstiatar

and lead in home plumbing fixtures are encouraged to contact the City's Utilities Division to schedule a free water testing by calling the Water Treatment Plant at 810-787-6537 and pressing #1 after prompted or by emailing flintwater@cityofflint.com. The City of Flint is working proactively along with the County Health Department, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to improve the water system throughout.the City. An accelerated plan to add a corrosion control agent to our water within 30 to 60 days with expedited approval from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality is already underway. This will reduce corrosion which can cause lead in old pipes to leach into the water. This plan is in addition to Mayor Walling's letter requesting $30 Million in water infrastructure assistance funding from the State of Michigan. $10 Million of that request would be for the replacement of lead service lines in households to ensure that lead no longer presents a danger to the drinking water of our residents. As the letter states, "It is the City's position that the abatement of lead through the removal of lead containing pipes and fixtures in homes is the best long term solution to keeping our residents' water safe." Mayor Walling further stated: "I am extremely concerned about the risks around lead with Flint's children and I will be working tirelessly to ensure the water is safe and all of our families have the information they need. I also will continue to pursue funding for infrastructure improvements and a comprehensive healthy homes initiative that addresses lead in paint and pipes. We have to get the lead out of our commun ity to eliminate the threat of childhood lead poisoning." The City of Flint continues working proactively with the County Health Department, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to improve the water system throughout the City. The City remains committed to working with all of our partners in the Water Technical Advisory Committee to address all
City Hall
1101 S. Saginaw Street- Flint, Michigan 48502 810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvoffiint.com

.. '

. . Dayne.w!ilunu . . ·. ·
Mayor·

rlistaslla· . . .~ K*'ndW5on CIIY,.Adininlstrator

issues of public health and quality concerns that face the community.

Updates on

progress made in addressing this issue will be made during regular public meetings including City Council and other scheduled meetings. Information on this and all related matters will continue to be posted on the City of Flint's website, cityofflint.com.

-END-

City Hall 1101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.con\

Blood Lead Testing of Children in Flint, Before and After the Change in Flint's Water
The change in Flint's water source occurred in April 2014. MDHHS looked at children's blood lead levels (BLL) before and after this event. The dark blue line (May 2014- April 2015) and the green line (May-August 2015) reflect children's blood lead tests after the change. All other lines reflect tests before the change. An increase in childhood lead poisoning in summer (July, August, September) is typical throughout Michigan every year. While there is a dramatic difference between the numbers of elevated BLL in the summer before and after the event, a wider look that includes data back to 2010 shows that the year BEFORE the event (the yellow line} was more of an anomaly than the year after (the dark blue line}. If elevated BLL were being driven by the change in water, we would expect t he dark blue line to stay high rather than follow the seasonal pattern. All data included in this analysis were reported by laboratories directly to MDHHS, in accordance with State law.
City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age with Rrst-Time Elevated Blood Lead Levels*
35 ·- - - - - - - - ---------·- - ..

- ···--

- -- - -

30

-------·

20

15

10

5 -

·-- - - - - ·

0
May

..
June July
Aug

-- - - - - -- - -Jan

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec

Feb

Mar

Apr

- 2010-2011

2011-2012

~2012-2013

~2013-2014

-2014-2015

-2015

*This graph Includes: Children whose address is listed as "Fiint"-may not conform exactly to Flint city limits Children less than 16 years of age at time of test Only first-tim e blood lead levels>= 5 ug/dL All first-time elevated levels, regardless of sample type (venous, capillary or unknown}

September 24, 2015
Source: MDHHS Datil Warehouse,

l:.ld sPecimen table

Blood Lead Testing of Children in Flint, Before and After the Change in Flint's Water
0

Blood lead testing (regardless of elevated levels) also tends to rise during late summer (August, September, October). This graph shows that testing in Flint has remained fa irly steady over the last five years, except for a recent decline(MayAugust 2015).

City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age Tested for Lead Poisoning
600

500

....... ·--- --- --

-. -----

400

300

-

200 - - -- - ------- - -- - - -- ·· ----· ···-··· - - ··- ------- -----·-·· - --

···------·-

_____ _ _:r _ _ __

100

.. ---

----·-- - - - - - - - - ···" · - -·- - . --- -

. .. --

- -- - --- - - ·-- - --

0
May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan
-2014-2015

Feb

Mar

Apr

-2010-2011

- 2 011-2012

= 2012-2013

~2013-2014

-2015

*This graph includes: Children whose address is listed as "Fiint"-may not conform exactly to Flint city limits Children Jess than 16 years of age at time oftest The number of children tested wrthin each month. sour= Some.children are tested more than once, and may be included in more than one month or year.

september 24,20l.5 MDHHS Data wareno:lSe, Lead Specimen table

Blood Lead Levels in FJint Talking Points September 24, 2015
· Promoting the health of our residents is a statewide priority- a priority that includes ensuring clean, safe drinking water for all residents and especially children. · The results of the Hurley Children's Hospital are under review by th e Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. · The analysis that Hurley conducted is different from the way MDHHS has analyzed data regarding blood lead levels in Flint. · MDHHS is looking to see if we can replicate the results of the Hurley study to see how they achieved their results.
MDHHS Blood Lead Testing Results in Flint

·

MDDHS data shows a comprehensive look at the data since 2010, years before the change in Flint's water source occurred in April 2014.

·

Each year shows a seasonal Increase in childhood lead poisoning in the summer months, the highest seasonal increase of which occu rred in 2010.

·

If elevated blood lead levels were being driven by the change in water, we would expect to see the elevated levels remain high after the change in water source, rath er than follow the seasonal pattern as they did by decreasing in the fall months.

·

All data included in the MDHHS analysis were reported by laboratories directly to MDHHS, In accordance with State Law.

Differences in Analysis

·

MDHHS data provides a much more robust picture of the entire blood lead levels for the Flint area, and specifically, accounts for data over the full course of the past five years.

·

Looking at the past five years as a whole provides a much more accurate look at the seasonal trends of lead in th e area.

·

Seasonal exposure is higher in the summer for a variety of r easons including children playing outside in the soil, and when windows are open and lead paint is more likely to be in the air. This seasonal increase wou ld be unrelated to the water system.

·

Our data includes children from the entire city, including all medical faci lities, rather than just Hurley, has a larger age group of children, and includes a much larger sample size.

·

The MDHHS analysis looks specifically at the .first elevated blood lead level for each child, which provid es an accurate picture of when first exposure occurred.

o

The Hurley data includes a smaller sample size, much more limited time period (JanuarySeptember of 2013 and 2015 only), and a smaller age group of children.

WIC Children
· In homes with infants on WIC, if the household has documentation from an official source of unsanitary water supp ly issues, that family may be eligible to receive ready-tofeed formula . Families should contact WIC to see if they are eligible. · · Each household would have to be looked at on an indivi dua l basis. WIC cannot cover bottled water.

From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Sent: Sunday, September 27, 2015 11:29 AM To: Snyder, Riel< (G Cc: Calley, Brian ( Subject: Treasury This is from our meeting last week on Flint. Sent from my iPhone Begin forwarded message:

Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>

From: "Saxton, Thomas (Treasury)" <SaxtonT@michigan.gov> Date: September 16, 2015 at 5:18:54 PM EDT To: "Muchmore, Dennis {GOV)" <muchmored@michigan.gov>, "Khouri, Nick (TREASURY)" <KhouriN@m ichigan.gov> Cc: "Lyon, Nicl< (DCH)" <LyonN2@michigan.gov>, " Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" <WyantD@mlchlgan.gov>, "Wurfel, Brad (DEQ)" <WurfeiB@mlchlgan.gov>, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" <AgenJ@michigan.gov>, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" <clemente@michigan.gov>, "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" <hollinsh@michigan.gov>, "Roberts, John (DTMB)" <RobertsJ9@michigan.gov>, "Workman, Wayne (TREASURY)" <Worl<manW@michigan.gov> Subject: Flint Attached is the summary (prepared by Wayne's staff) of the call we/Treasury had yesterday with Flint. would say nothing 'enlightening' really came out of the call. As indicated they asked about the status of the $30mm request to the Governor. Which coincidently is the ballpark number they are at risk for in the rate lawsuit(s). We said we did not have an immediate response other than it would likely require an appropriation by the legislature. This would probably lead to similar requests from other urban communities; but, we are still looking at it. We are not aware of any existing qualifying projects that the City has sought funding for in the SRFdrinking water program. They had asked previously for some funds on the wastewater side but had withdrawn the request because they lacked match funds.

1

From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV} Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 12:04 PM To: Snyder, Rick {GOV I , ·· . i· "·. Subject: FW: Letter to Just got this. From: Andrew Leavitt [mailto:ALeavitt@senate.michigan.gov] Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 11:45 AM To: Muchmore, Dennis {GOV} <muchmored@michigan.gov> Subject: Letter to Governor Snyder: Flint Water Hi Dennis, Senator Ananlch began drafting the attached letter on Sunday and thought it would be h~lp.ful to gu ide our 12pm call. Thanks, Andy

1

SENATE MINORITY LEADER

JIMANANICH
September 28, 2015 State of Michigan Executive Office of the Govcrno1· P.O. Box 30013 Lansing, MI 48909

© 617.373.0142 18 senjananlch@ senate.mlchlgan.gov 1\ll senateclems.comlananlch

Govemor Snyder, Access to safe, affordable drinking water is a basic necessity for eveLy community. It is completely unacceptable that respected scientific experts and our trusted local physicians have verified that the City of Flint's drinking water is dangemus for our citizens, especially our most vulnerable young people. As a result, I am formally requesting assistance as suggested by the experts on the frontline of this public health crisis. Here are the top priorities we should work together to address:

1. Swift transfer to a safe source of water until the Karegnondi Water Authority
(KWA) project is complete next year. Your administration has the ability to ensure a financially acceptable and responsible contract between Flint and the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, particul arly in light of the public health implications with the Flint River supply. 2. Equally urgent is the need for corrosion control as recommended by independent scientific experts. There are chemical treatment additives that could help reduce this corrosion. I urge you to help the city implement anti-corrosion methods immediately. The cunent emergency makes the January timeline unacceptable. 3. Filters and bottled water assistance. Flint water touches the entire city. Whether it's a person's home, work, school, restaurant or place ofwmsbip, access to safe, clean drinking water should not be hindered. Water filters, used in conjm10tion with corrosion control methods, are necessmy to help guard against toxic exposure. I have been working with the philanthropic community and private sector to secure donations to acquire filters and water; however, more funds will be necessary to effectively cover the thousands of residents impacted. I would like to formally request emergency funding to help supplement the acquisition of water filters and bottled water. Any and all appropriate state or federal money to help accomplish this feat should be considered.

SENATE MINORITY LEADER

JIMANANICH

t.9 517.373.0142
13 sen}anMich@senate.mchlgan.gov 1\ll senatedems.com/ananlch

4. Support for completion of the KWA pipeline. It is presumed that the upcoming KWA pipeline will solve a number of problems associated with the current sourcing of Flint's water from the Flint River. I am requesting a meeting between representatives from yom office, KWA board members and project engineers to discuss any options to expedite the pipeline's constmction.

5. A long-term commitment to addr essing outdated infrastr ucture. A recent EPA report just outlined the billions of dollars necessary over the next several decades to adequately secure safe water for om entire state. You have the position and opportunity to be a national leader on moving the debate f01ward on this topic so that we can avoid the type of catastrophe my community is grappling with today.
I look forward to working with you to deliver on these concrete and mgent action items to alleviate the public health crisis facing our residents.

We jeopardize any progress and comeback for our cities and state if we cannot ensme safe, basic necessities for our families or if we cannot come together swiftly to fix an identified, severe threat to the safety of our people. Sincerely,

anich emocratic Leader District 27

~

cc: U.S. Representative DanKildee Mayor Daync Walling, City of Flint . Howard Croft, City of Flint Susan Hedman, EPA Thomas Poy, EPA Michael Schock, EPA-ORD Darren Lytle, EPA-ORD Denise Fortin, EPA Liane Shekter-Smith, MDEQ Pat Cook, MDEQ Stephen Busch, MDBQ Brad WlU'fel, MDEQ MaTe Edwards, Virginia Tech

Governor Rick Snyder
Septelnber 28, 2015 Daily Briefing
Contents
September 281h Calendar Events Amazon Detroit Grand Opening 1. Briefing- Page 10 2. Press Release - Page 13 Rising Tide Event Briefing DTE Investor Day 1. Briefing - Page 22 2. Attendee List - Page 24 For Review Flint Water FAQ & Talking Points
26 - 30 10 - 14
I

Pages
2- 9

15-21

22 - 25

Note: No changes from Weekend Briefing

Are there ·other ways the city monitors for lead exposure? The County Health Department, overseen statewide by the Mich igan Department of Health and Human Services, regularly monitors blood levels in children throughout Michigan communities. The leading cause of lead poisoning is exposure to lead paint. Blood lead level testing results for the 12-month period just after the City of Flint changed its water source (May 2014- April2015) showed no significant change in the pattern of blood lead levels in Flint, compared to the previous three years. This data suggests the recent change in water source by the City of Flint has not contributed to an increase. in lead exposure throughout the community. · How does the state decide if the water is creating a lead problem? Compliance with the federal lead rule is based on a goth percentile calculation. If more than 10 percent of samples report lead above the federal action level of 15 parts per billion, a water supply has an "action level exceedance." An exceedance is not a violation. It triggers other requirements which could include public notification, additional water quality sampling, and possibly further treatment. While some of Flint's individual samples exceeded the 15 parts-per-billion lead action level, compliance is based on the 901h percentile of samples. The City of Flint's goth percentile level has ranged between 0 parts per billion in 2008 and 2011 , and 15 parts per billion in 1992, but never exceeded the action level. The two most recent sampling periods, in 2014 and 2015, were 6 parts per billion and 11 patis per billion, respectively. Did the city use every sample they got back? Sampling requirements for lead and copper are designed to target the most common pathways to lead ingestion in homes with the least protection. The sample must be collected from a commonly used kitchen or bathroom tap, and in accordance with the provided sampling instructions. Homes that employ filtration or additional treatment cannot be included. Samples must also be collected within the established monitoring period. I have a lead service connection or lead plumbing. What shou ld I do? Replacement is the only way to e liminate lead exposure. However, here are some interim steps homeowners can take to reduce it: Flush pipes before drinking, and only use cold water for consumption. The more time water has been sitting in your home's pipes, the more lead it may contain. When water in a particular faucet has not been used for six hours or longer, "flush" cold-water pipes by running the water until it becomes as cold as it will get. This could take five to 30 seconds if there has been recent water use elsewhere in the home, such as showering or flushing toilets. Othetwise, it could take two minutes or longer. Use only water from the cold-water tap for drinking, cooking, and especially for making baby formula. Hot water is likely to contain higher levels of lead.
2

Who is responsible for replacement of leaded materials? Replacement of service pipes on private property and any leaded plumbing materials within the home is a homeowner's responsibility. The City of Flint owns the service pipe from the water main to the curb stop valve, and that is the City's responsibility. This valve is normally located two feet in from the street curb. From there to the house is private property and the responsibility of the homeowner. · Why doesn't the city at least replace its portion of lead service lines? Partial lead service line replacement has been shown to mobilize more lead and make the situation worse. Only full lead service line replacement has been demonstrated effective in achieving long-term reductions in drinking water lead levels. What is the City's timeline for installation of corrosion control treatment? The federal government allows the steps to complete the installation of optimal corrosion control treatment and follow-up monitoring to take up to five years. However, the City of Flint has committed to completing installation of Optimized Corrosion Control Treatment in less than six months. What will happen when Flint joins the Karegnondi Water Authority next year? The City has committed to having Optimized Corrosion Control Treatment in place prior to its connection with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). The water provided by KWA will come from a new source, Lake Huron. The city will continue its lead and copper sampling every six months. Additionally, the city's water treatment plant will continue to op'erate with uninterrupted Optimized Corrosion Control Treatment. How long would it take to replace lead service lines throughout Flint? The city has about 32,900 service connections in total. More than 15,000 of these connections are considered lead service lines. Even if many crews were contracted, it would ·likely take up to 15 years to complete this work. What would it cost to replace the lead service line at my house? Average costs to replace a lead service line at an individual home range from $2,000 to $8,000. Costs vary depending on the length and size of service line that is needed, as well as the ground cover and soil conditions encountered. With more than 15,000 lead service lines at an estimated average cost of $4,000 for each replacement, total cost cou ld be $60 million or more.

3

Blood Lead levels in Flint Talking Points September 24, 2015
· Promoting the health of our residents is a statewide priority- a priority that includes ensuring clean, safe drinking water for all residents and especially children. · The results of the Hurley Children's Hospital are under review by the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. · The analysis that Hurley conducted is different from the way MD HHS has analyzed data regarding blood lead levels in Flint. · M DHHS is looking to see if we can replicate the results of the Hurley study to see how they achieved their results.

MDHHS Blood Lead Testing Results in Flint
· M DDHS data shows a comprehensive look at the data since 2010, years before the change in Flint's water source oc~urred in April 2014. · Each year shows a seasonal increase in childhood lead poisoning in the summer months, the highest seasonal increase of which occu rred in 2010. · If elevated blood lead leve ls were being driven by the change in water, we would expect to see the elevated levels remain high after the change in water source, rather than follow the seasonal pattern as they did by decreasing in the fall months. · All data included in the MDHHS analysis were reported by laboratories directly to MDHHS, in accordance with State Law.

Differences in Analysis
· MDHHS data provides a much more robust picture of the entire blood lead levels for the Flint area, and specifically, accounts for data over the full course of the past f ive years. · Looking at the past five years as a whole provides a much more accurate look at the seasonal trends of lead in the area. · Seasonal exposure is higher in the summer for a variety of reasons including children playing outside in the soil, and _when windows are open and lead paint is more likely to be in the air. This seasona l increase would be unrelated to the water system .
a

Our data includes children from the entire city, including all medical facilities, rather than just Hurley, has a larger age group of children, and includes a much larger sample size.

·

The MDHHS analysis looks specifically at the first elevated blood lead level for each child, which provides an accurate picture of when first exposure occurred.

o

The Hurley data includes a smaller sample size, much more limited time period (JanuarySeptember of 2013 and 2015 on ly), and a smaller age group of children.

WIC Children
· In homes with infants on WIC, if the household has documentation from an official source of unsanitary water supply issues, that family may be eligible to receive re ady-tofeed formula. Fami lies should contact WIC to see if they are eligible. · · Each household would have to be looked at on an individual basis. WIC cannot cover bottled water.

From: Scott, Allison (GOV) Sent: Tuesday, September 29, 2015 11:06 AM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Subject: FW: Flint Water

fyi
From: Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) Sent: Tuesday, September 29, 2015 11:00 AM To: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov> Cc: Agen, Jarred (GOV) <AgenJ@michlgan.gov> Subject: Flint Water Timeline

Per our discussion, attached is the draft timeline that Tom Saxton sent to Dennis

Wendy Wisniewski
Executive Assistant to Dennis Muchmore and Beth Clement Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder George W. Romney Building, 2nd Floor 111 South Capitol Avenue P.O. Box 30013 Lansing, Ml48909 (517) 241 -5601 WisniewskiW@michigan.gov

1

4425 (Rev. 04-15)

STATE OF MICHIGAN
RICK SNYDER
GOVERNOR

DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
LANSING

NICK A. KHOURI
STATE TREASURER

Flint Water Timeline (09-28-15)
June 26, 2012 - Letter from Flint EM Mike Brown to DWSD for permission to begin blending
Flint River water with treated water from DWSD. The letter indicates that the DEQ is supporting this option and its implementation would save the City between $2M and $3M annually. · ~:·:::~!::.-;;::~::::.·~:[~:·:-:-;·. !j·).~·~:::~::.:·=:·:.:.:. :.. , .;;.:·~~:·::-. 5::::.:~~:::~::~::::::; ::~:-:~::·:! . ~~:::;::::::. ::::= ::;::r~~:-~::r:::;·:}~·:: Se ~-j_~~Jj~i(~g}~_Q12- Lt~~i/rnsti,i)~~t EM Ed ~¥ti\o DWSD r~@f§tiligL%·iHbii~~t~M6riJ6 qP,!fpn. is ::(.::;

im~~inent thl.~l~~ding
f>~l \t?~:

pu~1¥~se water fr9m DW~X). will ~tM9'ily incre~s~' to $·2-~M per ye:~tPY fiscal year 202Q~\

Oc~~~er 31, 20~g~:~ An\\iJ:sis by J~~:: Flint Fi£.i,~hce\p~·ector s~gg~sts that the ann~~t)cost to

(;~:~

ApP,i;~yal requ~$it~f~y October~}:2012. ~?f~ BV 't?':. lt#

~:.{~!

No~~f!ber 2012 f:}reasWifetaUWJ:~clcer, Y~WJg, Jaclc~£~. and T~YJTYJT)'to evaluatq.:r~e KWA

;;~!t~l

it?;~

~r;~~:~\tn.)y::··.

/JF

\X~.

[:~M~~1V\=:~t:~~\~i

1\U

pr1~;!ia1 to the )1iftfFl~f:~1

\~~i=~:~i\

A~~:~~li)i:i~~~:1}~~:~:;\~:t,

t~~~tJ

i::;l={. !

Not.~~ber 6, :7.9~~- Lef@1 from F~~ Em%,tency Man~M~: Ed ~*tz to State Treasqt~f. Dillon ~~~J!RWR8~~~Jrbm DW~,P ~s expe~r~~ b~~~J?at the initia{J~.~essfR~P.t is that switchinft? KWA IS J.ii:llie::best~uiterest oftlie·C1ty of Flint' t:·:::': !.":;:~~'~ :;.::,;,i :'::.= = ::: ··:..:.:.: :-:-~-:-: :·· ! l"·"· . ·..:.:-~·=-·: '.::.:.:·: -.:.:::~·: · \.::::~.; \ .,,:::.>.:-' <.·'..:->

February 2013 - TYJT issues a fmalreport to Treasury on the comparison between Karegnondi
Water Authority (KWA) and DWSD. Analysis suggests that the KWA option is the cheaper option for the City of Flint.

March 2013 - DWSD contacts the City of Flint to begin direct negotiations on a contract
extension. M ultiple options are provided to the Flint Emergency Manager (EM) Ed Kurtz.

March 26, 2013 - The Flint City Council endorses joining KWA.
Aprilll, 2013 - State Treasurer Andy Dillon authorizes Flint EM Ed Kmtz, pursuant to Section
12(3) ofP.A. 436 of2012, to enter into a contract with KWA if a final offer from DWSD is either not received for rejected in good faith based upon specific objections.

AprillS, 2013- DWSD provides a best and final offer to the City of Flint. Analyses by Flint EM
Ed Kurtz, theDepmtment ofEnvironmental Quality and Treasury's Office ofFiscal Responsibility independently conclude that the KWA option is cheaper for the City of Flint.

April 16, 2013 -Flint EM Ed Kmtz informs the State Treasurer that the City willjoinKWA. This
decision was officially announced May 1, 2013.

P.O. BOX 30728 · LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909-8228 www.mlchlgan.gov/lreasury · 517-373-3227

Page2

April17, 2013 - DWSD transmits a letter to Flint EM Eel Kurtz terminating service to the City of Flint, effective Apri117, 2014. June 2013- Groundbreaking for the Karegnondi Water Authority. Flint also requests full time use of the Flint Water Treatment Plant with Flint River water as a source. June 28, 2013 - Financing Contract between the City of Flint and KWA is approved. Effective September 1, 2013. This document was signed by EM Mike Brown. February 19, 2014 - The KWA Board ofDirectors adopts Resolution 2014-01, authorizing KWA to bond for water line construction on-behalf of the City of Flint. April17, 2014- Water service from DWSD officially ends. The City of Flint also conducts two
separate public forums regarding the use of Flint River water, upgrades to the City' s water system and the overall cost ofthe switch to KWA.

April25, 2014- City conducts public event marking the transition to the use of Flint River water. DEQ infmmation shows that transition complete by May 2015. March 3, 2015- Flint EM Jerry Ambrose provides a memorandum to Deputy State Treasurer
Wayne Worlanan stating that a reconnection to DWSD will cost the City $10.1M/yeru: and that water purchases could be as high as $1M/month.

March 12,2015 - The City ofFlinthires Veolia to conduct an operational evaluation ofthe City's
water system.

From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 4:34PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) Subject: FW: Flint financial update

Fyi From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) Sent: Thursday, October 1, 2015 2:15 PM To: Muchmore, Dennis {GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth {GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Durfee, Sally {TREASURY) <DurfeeS1@michigan.gov>; Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) <KhouriN@michigan.gov> Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) <SaxtonT@michigan.gov>; Stanton, Terry A. {Treasury) <StantonT@michigan.gov> Subject: Fwd: Flint update So we don't forget the money; Flint is now running a $14,000,000 deficit in the WaterFund due to two lawsuits that have gone against th e City. It has reduced what t hey can bill some folks have stopped paying believing they will be getting big credits or refunds. Also water cont be shut off for nonpayment under one suit

Sent from my iPho ne Begin forwarded message: From: "Byrne, Randall (Treasury)" <ByrneR1@michigan.gov> Date: October 1, 2015 at 10:29:51 AM EDT To: "Workman, Wayne (TREASURY)" <WorkmanW@michigan.gov> Cc: "Saxton, Thomas {Treasury)" <SaxtonT@mlchigan.gov>, "Schafer, Suzanne K. (Treasury)" <SchaferS7@michlgan.gov> Subject: Flint update Wayne: The local television station reported this morning that the Flint Finance Director informed the City Council last night that they project a deficit of $14M in their Water and Sewer Fund at year end. I spoke to Natasha this morning and requested a copy of their budget report and a cash flow analysis to verify this information. I should have this information today.

1

Think Green I Don't print this e-mail unless you n eed to.

·
·;

.

Randall Byrne I State Administrative Manager

[

'

local Government Services- Office of Fiscal Responsibility
State of Michigan I 430 W. Allegan Street, 3rd Floor I Lansing, Ml 48922 {517) 335-2521 I {517) 373-0633 (fax) I BvrneRl @michigan.gov

CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipient(s) and may contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the law. Any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-mail, and delete/destroy all copies of the original message and attachments.

2

From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 4:31 PM To: Snyder, Rick ( G O V ) Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) ~thumus, Dick (GOV) <Posthumusd@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov> Subject: Flint I talked with Dayne Walling at length today a few minutes ago, and Harvey and I had separate meetings with one of the Flint minister groups and t hen Rep. Neely. Our conversations were cordial for the most with the normal concerns being expressed . I told Rep. Neely that I felt he hadn't gotten enough respect and insight into our thoughts on this and we expanded our backgrounder for him and he was very appreciative. He actually cancelled a Black Caucus meeting called for to day on this due to Harvey and our meeting. I have Dan and Nick calling him just to update . More importantly, we have the proposal back from DWSD for a reconnect: 1. Short term reconnect is ok until KWA starts operating; 2. No reconnect fee and immediate reconnect; 3. Expenses incurred at actual cost although no estimate at this time 4. A fixed monthly rate of $662,1.00 +a commodity rate of $8.93mcf for current 15-16 FY; 5. Rate is over and above water sales to Genesee County Drain Commission; 6. A water wholesale adjustment; 7. Only extends to Flint; 8. Rates for 16-17 FY would be the same as other customers. Mayor Duggan is more than willing to lend his support. I'm asking Saxton for a ballpark ca lculation. We would have to find them the money for this reconnect, but Dayne is more than open (as is Ananich to a lesser degree) to finding some revolving fund that they would repay perhaps on an extended basis or maybe using some guarantee to reduce the borrowing costs.

1

From: Paciorek, Josh (GOV) Sent: Friday, October 02, 2015 10:31 AM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@ n.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV} <AgenJ@michigan.gov> Subject: Updated Flint Water posters/infographics Governor, Attached are the updated infographicsjposters with the action items reordered th e way you suggested. Josh

1

,.. .. .. .· .· . · .·. ·. ·.··.···· ···.· . ·_ ·.·.··· · .·...· .··· ····

~

+~~~· ~·G ···· · · · · ·-· ··.·.·_· ···.·.· ·.·.· ··· .

. ·. · ··

]···· ·~

s . - ~·~:ACT~ ON
·~
I

<Q)~~ ~.~~~:J:j~~!~~T~W«

I

!'

I
I : I !
I ' I

.i

I

Testing in Flint public schools immediately to ensure that drinking water is safe, with testing also available at no cost to any other school in Flint.

i i! i l
I
i, I

1

! I ! I !
i I ,

l

Ill Ill

Expanding health exposure testing of individual homes. Offering free water testing to Flint residents to assure their drinking water is safe. Accelerating corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system. Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee to ensure the best technology, practices and science are being followed by adding an expert from the Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Research and Development to the group. Accelerating water system improvements to address replacing lead service lines.

I i
I

i
i

.

I I
I

I
I

I !

I ! i !
l !

I I
l
I

II II
I I
I

l
l

Expediting the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline. Naming Dr. Eden Wells, chief medical executive for the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, as the Flint drinking water public health adviser.
Providing water filters to residents with concerns or who are included in state assistance programs.

I
i I
I

I

I I

I

I
I

I

I

l
I

Creating a comprehensive lead education program to make sure residents have detailed information about how to protect themselves and their homes.

I

I
I

To get your water tested for free, please call the city of Flint Water Plant at (81 0) 787-6537 and then press 1. You can also email flintwater@cityofflint.com

I .... .. .. . . . . . . . ......... ......... . . . . ........ . ... ...... ......... I c~-~ TAK~NG
...
.. .

r· ······ .. ·· . .. .... ..... ............. ...... ................ ............. ................ .. .............. ........................ ..... ... .... ............ ..... ...................... ..... .......... .... ..... .
....... .............. ... . .... . ...... .......... ............ .... ..... . ..... .. . ... ..
..

,

I

~~~OIT\~ ~lij~1 Wfo\1'~W«
www.mi.govtFIIniWator
r-·

·~ACT~ ON
· -··

·

~~~~--

6

...

·

,

o·o

,

I

:"fl','

.

- Tips for Flint Residents ......
~-.,

_,,,.

.

__...

.

·

Lead plumbing is common in homes built prior to "1 986, and anyone in the state with lead pipes in their home can take some extra precaut ions to minimize lead In their drinking water.

,1.
~r ==

= =
To ensure safe drinking water, you can also get a free filter. Please visit mi.gov/f~ornli:Water to find where you can get a free filter.
~

=
~

=
,p'

4

~

~

=

~

' ' ~~~~~---~~~~~-------~~ '
0
To get your water tested for free, please call the city of Flint Water Plant at (81 0) 787-6537 and then press 1. You can also email flinlwater@cltyofflint.com

Additionally, more lead gets into hot water than cold water. [LJ)se o rn~y co~<dl wa~er ffoll' <D'lro~nkornlgJ, cooidB1laJ alnldl ~ malldng lbaby ffoll"Mllll~a.

--- - - ,
.,;

~

;

-----Original Message----From: Agen, Jarrod {GOV) Sent: Friday, October 02, 2015 10:35 AM To : Snyder, Rick {GOV) Cc: Scott, Allison {GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov> Subject : Re: Flint Josh just sent infogra phics . On filters-- Dan Wyant just called to t ell me we ca n anno unce $1 million for filters out of a settlement fund in DEQ. Will be put into supplemental approps bill next week.
1 1 11 get more on timing of availability. Gettings answers on these others t oo.

>On Oct 2, 2015, at 7 :12 AM, Snyder, Rick {G

wrote:

>
> Do we have updated infographs?

>
> Do we have an answer as to how to reconcile w hat Genesse Cou nty said yesterday w ith what we are saying today?

>
>Any more inf o on t he timing of filt er availability?

>
>Best w ay to t all< about discussions with GLWA?

>
> Thanks > Rick

>
>Sent f rom my iPad

1

-----Original Message----From: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Sent: Friday, October 02, 2015 12:33 PM To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov> Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan .gov> Subject: Re: Question to consider We need Treasury to work with Dan and Flint on a clear side by side comparison of the health benefits and costs of GLWA vs. a more optimized Flint system. Also, we need to look at what financing mechanisms are available to Flint to pay for any higher cost actions. Please get people working on these two issues ASAP. Thanks Riel< Sent from my iPad >On Oct 2, 2015, at 8:04AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov> wrote:

>
> 01<. Walling, Ananich and Kildee are pushing privately for that to be considered. We'll collect as much info as possible. Dayne is setting up a meeting with DWSD on his own and I thought that his initiation without our encouragement or leadership was the right way to approach it. I just told Dayne to be careful about some twist that hasn't yet been considered.

>
»On Oct 2, 2015, at 10:57 AM, Snyder, Riel< (GOV) rote: >> »We should help get all of the facts on the consequences of changing back vs. staying and then determine what financing mechanisms we have available. If we can provide the financing, then we should let Flint make the decision.

>>
»Thanks »Rick

>>
»Sent from my iPad >> »>On Oct 2, 2015, at 7:38AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov> wrote: >» >»It appears on the surface (without the deep dive we'll definitely do on it) that for $11M we can reconnect to DWSD system for the intervening time before I<WA comes on line. That may well be the only way to bring any confidence back to the community. If you choose to do so, what if we created or expanding some revolving fund where Flint wouldn't have to start repaying until2020 or whenever in the future to stretch the liability? If we needed to have a guarantee perhaps we could use the Escheats of the bottle bill money as a set aside or guarantor without having to touch the principal?
1

From: GOV Newsroom [mailto:govnewsroom@govsubscriptions.michigan.gov] Sent: Friday, October 02, 2015 1:58 PM To: Snyder, Rick {GOV) Subject: NEWS RELEASE: Gov. action plan will help Flint residents address water concerns

Governor Rick Snyde~ -

REINVENTIN:

. ICHIGAN

Getting tt Right. Gettln It Done.

Contacts: Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 517-335-6397
Brad Wurfel, 517-284-6713

Department of Environmental Quality
Jennifer Eisner, 517-230-9804

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Friday, October 2, 2015

Department of Health and Human Services

Editor's Note: Click here for infographic and action plan.

Gov. Rick Snyder: Comprehensive action plan will help Flint residents address water concerns
Collaborative effort with state, federal and city leaders focuses on testing, assistance FLINT, Mich. - Flint residents need to have access to safe, clean, water now and long into the future, Gov. Rick Snyder said, announcing a comprehensive action plan created with state, federal and city leaders to address concerns about drinl<ing water.

1

The water leaving Flint's drinl<ing water system is safe to drink, but some families with lead plumbing in their homes or service connections could experience higher levels of lead in the water that comes out of their faucets. The action plan focuses on increasing water testing, offering additional precautions for families with lead plumbing in their homes, and providing long-term solutions to address the city's water infrastructure challenges. The plan was created at Snyder's direction by the Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and Health and Human Services (DHHS), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the city of Flint. "We are focus.ed on helping ensure safe, clean, accessible dri nking water and addressing and mitigating concerns and protecting public health," Snyder said. "Today's action plan bui.Jds upon ongoing work with local, state and federal agencies and our partnership with city and community leaders. Together, we are working to ensure that all Flint residents have accurate information and know that help is available to address potential problems." The city and the state also are working together to gather more data to ensure the water that leaves the treatment plant as well as the water that arrives in Flint homes is safe for all residents. The plan includes: · · · · · · · · · · Testing in Flint public schools immediately to ensure that drinking water is safe, with testing also available at no cost to any other school in Flint. Offering free water testing to Flint residents to assure their drinking water is safe. Providing free water filters to residents. Expanding health exposure testing of individual homes. Accelerating corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system. Accelerating water system improvements to address replacing lead service lines. Expediting the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline. Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee to ensure the best technology, practices and science are being followed by adding an expert from the Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Research and Development to the group. Naming Dr. Eden Wells, chief medical executive for the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, as the Flint drinking water public health adviser. Boosting a comprehensive lead education program to make sure residents have detailed information about how to protect themselves and their homes.

Residents can have their water tested by calling 810-787-6537 and pressing 1, or emailing flintwater@cityofflint.com. The DEQ is covering the cost of this testing. State leaders have been working closely with state and federal lawmakers to tap resources at all levels of government to address concerns. State health experts said there has been an increase in elevated childhood blood lead levels in some specific communities. Initial analysis of MDHHS data found that blood lead levels of children in Flint have followed an expected seasonal trend. While this analysis for Flint as a whole remains true, a comprehensive and detailed review breal<ing down data by ZIP codes with the city revealed that MDHHS data is consistent with a study presented recently by Hurley Children's Hospital. "While we cannot conclusively say that the water source change is the sole cause of the increase, this analysis supports our efforts as we take active steps to reduce all potential lead exposures in Flint," MDHHS Director Nick Lyon said. "As part of this, we are working closely with our public and
2

private partners to provide Flint residents on MDHHS assistance programs with free water filters and inform families about the steps they can take to reduce all lead exposures in their home." As a part of the action plan, National Sanitation Foundation certified water filters will be made available to Flint residents through emergency state funds and coordinated efforts with local community agencies and donors. Information about how to obtain the filters will soon be available. "This action plan offers concrete steps we will take in a local, state and federal partnership to ensure all Flint residents have safe water to drink," DEQ Director Dan Wyant said. "The DEQ will work closely with the city to gather further data to ensure the water that leaves Flint's system as well as the water that arrives in Flint homes is safe to drink." Additional information is available at www.michigan.gov/flintwater.

###
STAY CONNECTED:

n e ll~
This email was sent to 335-7858 on behalf of: The Executive Office of the Governor · 111 South Capitol Avenue · Lansing, Ml 48909 · 517-

3

-----Original Message----From: Snyder, Riel< (GOV) Sent: Friday, October 02, 2015 12:33 PM To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov> Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov> Subject: Re: Question to consider We need Treasury to work with Dan and Flint on a clear side by side comparison of the health benefits and costs qf GLWA vs. a more optimized Flint system. Also, we need to look at what financing mechanisms are available to Flint t o pay for any higher cost actions. Please get people working on these two issues ASAP. Th anks Rick Sent from my iPad >On Oct 2, 2015, at 8:04AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <m uchmored @michigan.gov> wrote:

>
>Ole Walling, Ananich and l<ildee are push ing private ly for that to be considered. We'll collect as much info as possible. Dayne is setting up a meeting with DWSD on his own and I thought that his initiation without our encouragement or leadership was the right way to approach it. I just told Dayne to be careful abo ut some twist that hasn't yet been considered.

>
» On Oct 2, 2015, at 10:57 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) >> »We should help get all of the facts on the consequences of changing back vs. staying and t hen determine what financing mecha nisms we have available; If we can provide the financing, then we should let Flint make the decision.

>>
» Thanks »Rick >> » Sent fro m my iPad

>>
»> On Oct 2, 2015, at 7:38AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <m uchmored@michigan.gov> wrote: »> »> It appears on the surface (without the deep dive we'll definitely do on it) that for $11M we can reconnect to DWSD system for the intervening t ime before I<WA comes on line. That may well be t he only way to bring any confidence back to the community. If you choose to do so, what if we created or expa nding some revolving fund where Flint wouldn't have to start repaying until2020 or whenever in the future to stretch the liability? If we needed to have a guarantee perhaps we could use the Escheats of the bottle bill money as a set aside or guarantor without having to touch the principal?
1

-----Original Message----From: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 7:38AM To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfels@michigan.gov> Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan .gov>; Clement, Elizabeth {GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Scott, Allison (GOV) <scot ta 12@michigan .gov> Subject: Flint water question from Mildred She claimed that two Flint children were in critical condition over lead. Her source was Rev. Bullock. I sa id I wasn't aware of that and that all of t he identified ch ildren were be ing tracked by public health officials. Please check on the status of children with higher level of lead. Thanks Rick Sent from my iPad

1

From : Scott, Allison (GOV}

Sent: Tuesday, October 0 2015 8:21 AM
To: Snyder, Rick {GOV} Subject: Fwd: Flint Water updates

This will be daily plan Sent fi·om my iPhone Begin forwarded message:

·From: 11 Agen, Jan·od (GOV)" <AgenJ@michigan.gov> Date: October 6, 2015 at 8:20:24 AM EDT To: 11 Scott, Allison (GOV) 11 <scottal2@michigan.gov> Cc: 11 Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)'' <clemente@michigan.gov>, 11 Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 11
<muchmored@michigan.gov>

Subject: Rc: Flint Water updates
Update from Dan in briefing. Cornms to also send update for briefmg on stories or announcements upcoming. But Dan will have most accmate testing and analysis details to report.

On Oct 6, 2015, at 8: 14AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) <scottal2@michigan.gov> wrote: What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for briefmg each day or does Comms shop speak to DEQ Conuns and provide? Sent from my iPhone

We need a better update system re Flint Water.
1

I saw in the press this am that DHHS atmounced yesterday that water :filters would start being given out today. This should have come internally with more detail. I had press questions last night. Overall, we should have a daily repmt on Flint until our recommendations are fully implemented. For example: 1. What are the water test results from the public schools? 2. How many free test have been requested? How many have been done? How many remain and how long have they been waiting? What are the results - no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 3. How many :filters have been distributed? How many unfulfilled requests? 4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip codes. 5. Analysis oftech advisory group 6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. Flint River vs. KWA. Thanks Rick Sent from my iPad

2

-----0 rigi na I Message----From: Lyon, Nick (DHHS) Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 9:23 PM To: Snyder, Riel< (GOV) Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <m uchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Wyant, Dan (DEQ) <WyantD@michigan.gov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Roberts, Jo hn (DTMB) <RobertsJ9 @michigan.gov> Cc: Becker, Timothy (DHHS) <beckert1 @michlgan.gov>; Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) <lasherg@michigan.gov>; Hertel, Elizabeth (DHHS) <HertelE@michigan.gov>; Grijalva, Nancy (DHHS) <GrijalvaN@m ichigan.gov> Subject: Flint Water Filter Distribution Th e process of distributing water filters be~an on site today in Flint from the supply purchased by MDHHS. 909 were distri buted at MDHHS offices. 1,869 were distributed at the loca l Community Action Agency locations. 1,624 were distributed to the Flint Housing Commission for inst allation at low income housing. 186 to ea rly head sta rt, Mott Pari< Neighborhood Association and Commissioners. A total of 4,588 were distributed today. It was a good f irst day and shows our commitment to action. We will continu e to provide updates o n f ilters through Dan. Nick

1

Scott, Allison (GOV)
From: Sent: To: Subject: Attachments: Importance:
Snyder, Rick (GOV) Monday, January 18, 2016 11:26 AM Scott, Allison (GOV) FW: 2015-10-09 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update- FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CliENT PRIVILEGED 2015-10-09 Action Steps Week of October 12-16.pdf High

From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) Sent: Friday, October 09, 2015 4:57 PM To: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Agen,
Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) <DickinsonS@michigan.gov>; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) <emmittb@michigan.gov>; Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) <WyantD@michigan.gov> Subject: 2015-10-09 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update- FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED Importance: High

Dear Governor, Attached is our update for today, October 9, 2015. We have included more information to the 26 Action Steps that we sent to you yesterday. If you have any questions, please let me know. Thank you. Dan Wyant Director

1

City of Flint Water Action Steps for Week of October 12-16
Step No. Action Step Identify schools and prioritize for assessment Get DLARA plumbers organized Complete sampling instructions MDARD information for restaurants Update 2004 letter to EPA Approve Flint plan for water line Lead education plan for-schools for drinkinQ water Begin regular meetings with Flint Schedule Water Treatment Plant tour Meet with schools and DLARAinvitation only Update DEQ Web page Contact DHHS to see where they are with United Way regarding emergency declaration Circulate protocol draft with EPA Contact city about homeowner ry_ sample delive _ Communicate to MDARD and Flint that business samples should be coordinated though DEQ laboratory
Involved Parties

1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7.

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, DHHS, and Flint DEQ and DLARA DEQ, DHHS, and EPA MDARD, DHHS, and DEQ DEQ DEQ, Flint, and Genesee County DHHS and DEQ DEQ and Flint DEQ and Flint DEQ, DLARA, and Flint schools DEQ DEQ and DHHS

DEQ Point(s) of Contact Steve Busch Steve Busch Pat Cook Dana DeBruyn Dana DeBruyn Mike Prysby Liane Shekter Smith George Krisztian George Krisztian Karen Tommasulo Karen Tommasulo George Krisztian

Status
I

I

8. 9.
10. 11. 12.

13. 14.

DEQ and EPA DEQ and Flint DEQ, MDARD, and Flint

Liane Shekter Smith George Krisztian Liane Shekter Smith George Krisztian Liane to call MDARD and George to call Flint

15.

1

October 9, 2015

I

Step No. 16.

Action Step Figure out number of samples from schools and child care facilities Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of Contact for DHHS Contact KVVA to find out if there are any bottlenecks we need to remove Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate Plan Get update on service line index card conversion and identify where partial replacements exist Make sure DHHS gets information so they_ can cross reference Legislative contacts

Involved Parties DEQ

17.
18. 19. 20.

DEQ DEQ and KVVA DEQ and Flint DEQ and Flint

DEQ Point(s) of Contact Liane Shekter Smith Pat Cook Steve Busch George Krisztian Mike Prysby Mike Prysby Steve Busch

Status

Done

21. 22.

DEQ and DHHS DEQ

Steve Busch Magg ie Pallone Conference call with Sen. Jim Ananich scheduled for October 12 at 3 pm Mary Beth Thelen to schedule To be scheduled for October 15

23. 24. 25. 26.

Legislative time line and summary Reconnect with State Superintendent Brian Whiston Conduct After Action Plan Change Part 54 of NREPADrinking Water Revolving Loan Fund

DEQ DEQ and Department of Education DEQ DEQ, Treasury, and EPA

Maggie Pallone Dan Wyant George Krisztian Maggie Pallone Liane Shekter Smith Sonya Butler

-

2

October 9, 2015

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:
Duncan, Nancy (DTMB) Thursday, October 08, 2015 8:41 AM Roberts, John (DTMB); Snyder, Rick (GOV) Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Scott, Allison (GOV) RE: Flint Funding Request City of Flint Water Funding Solution.pdf

Sent:
To: Cc:

Subject: Attachments:

The DHHS number (for follow-up on children with elevated blood levels) increased slightly from $600k to $8501<, bringing the total state commitment to $10.6m gross/$8.2m GF. Revised chart attached.

From: Roberts, John (DTMB)

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:20PM
To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Duncan, Nancy (DTMB); Scott, Allison (GOV) Subject: Flint Funding Request

GovernorAttached is a summary of the funding recommendations, from the departments, to address the Flint Water situation. The total state commitment would be $10.4m; $7.9m of that amount is GF/GP. [The DHHS number needs to be verified tomonow morning, but the final number should be close to this estimate.] The funding will address 4 priority areas: 1. 2. 3. Provision of filters for residential service; 50% of the estimated cost to reconnect temporarily to the Detroit Water System; Funding for testing water samples; and

4. Other state assistance (e.g., home/school/health facility inspections and follow-up for children with elevated blood levels). We are preparing a formal supplemental request to transmit to the Legislature tomorrow. I intend to talk with Rep. Pscholka and Sen. Hildenbrand about including this funding in HB 41 02, the pending supplemental bill now awaiting House concunence. Assuming that they agree, we would ask for final action next week. Are you ok proceeding with these numbers?

John

1

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From: Sent: To: Subject: Attachments: Scott, Allison (GOV) Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:19 PM Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Snyder, Rick (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV) Fwd: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update- FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED City of Flint Water Funding Solution. pdf; A TTOOOOl.htm; FLINT SCHOOL TESTING RESULTS.DOCX; ATT00002.htm; Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in Schools and Child C.. .. doc; ATT00003.htm; Respon se to Corrosion Control Questions.docx; ATT00004.htm; Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights; ATTOOOOS.htm; CC Meeting Minutes 3-25-2013 (1).doc; ATT00006.htm; Flint.pdf; ATT00007.htm; KWA Contract (amended) 130165.2.pdf; ATT00008.htm

We will put in pdf fo r you Sent from my iPhone Begin forward ed message: From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" <WyantD@m ichigan.gov> Date: October 7, 2015 at 7:09:27 PM EDT To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" <scotta 12@michigan .gov>, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV}" <muchmored@michigan .gov>, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV}" <AgenJ@michigan .gov>, "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" <DickinsonS@m ich igan .gov>, "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" <emmittb@michigan.gov> Subject: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update- FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED

Governor Snyder, I wanted to provide you with the attached documents to address a number of the questions that you are asking today. A full briefing for the press conference, including press release , talking points, run of show, and frequently asked questions, will be provided by your team. Included in this e-mail are the following attachments:
1. 2.

3. 4. 5. 6.

Flint Drinking Water FY 2016 supplemental budget request summary Summary of the Flint schools water testing results and our response to the results Drinking water regulations for monitoring lead in schools and child care centers Response to the questions on corrosion control Summary of today's Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee meeting Flint City Council Minutes from March 25, 2013; the Resolution to Purchase Capacity from Karegnondi Water Authority; and the Amended Contract

Other Updates Mayor Duggan and Sue McCormick of DWSD were contacted, briefed, and are supporting tomorrow's announcement. Both have indicated they would provide positive comments supporting the decision. Dan Wyant
1

Governor Rick Snyder
October 8, 2015 Supplemental Briefing from DWyant
Contents
Summary: Flint Drinking Water FY2016 Supplemental Budget Request Summary: Flint Schools Water Testing Results Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring Lead in Schools & Childcare Centers Response to Questions on Corrosion Control Summary: Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee Meeting notes from 10-7-2015 City Council Items:
1. Flint City Council Minutes from 3-25-13- Page 8

: Pages
2

3

4-5

6

7

2. Resolution to Purchase Capacity from Karegnondi Water Authority - Page 20 3. Amended Contract - Page 27 ***NOTE: Other Update (from body ofDWyant email; no document attached)

8-28

Mayor Duggan and Sue McCormick ofDWSD were contacted, briefed, and are supporting tomorrow's announcement. Both have indicated they would provide positive comments supp01ting the decision.

City of Flint Water - Funding Solution State of Michigan Commitment

c==~=--==~~y-----==-il= G=~ -i-_ Gross~~Jt_____ ---~-~~~--~=~0~~~:~-------==-:---=-_ji il ! ii !Health _________ T!-$1,o16,ooo!--$l,o16,oooTTAY15 ;-;;rk project----------------------- -----------------1 rH · -1 ____Sl ___o_o_o__o _ o _ _
i FiJters:
, eat
&"Huma~s~~ces

-h·&--H--S-~--------------Tr-------- ~onT

OTTo" E"iis"t~t;R"e;i:~i~te_d_Settle-me;tFG;ct;p-;~~d-edt;-H HS Emerge~-;;-------;

1--------------------H---I I

: :: : : :services local office (FY16 appropriation). : ~---------------------1-i---------+-------------f-+-------------------------------------------------------i : Subtotal Filters:: l $1,016,000: $2,016,000: : :
I

uman erv1ces

,,

~·

.

.

, ·

,

I

!: .: ___________________________________________ _.:;. __.,.___________ !: :·F1int . .------·-------------:; !Environmental Quality !! $5,000,000! $6,000,000! iDEQState Restricted Settlement Fund of $1m; balance GF/GP : ~--------------s-ubi~-taiRe;~~-r;r;e"ct:Tr·· $s,ooo ,o oa: $6~oo-a:ooon-------------------------------------------------------------1
~..1.!..!.----------------------- ------------

:Reconnect to DSW:

r---

r

--------------~t-

II I I

rr---· ::
I I
I I

II

~----I

I I

--------!-+--------------It

,.
1 I

I I

I I

-----------· ------

---------------i
------~
I

J
I

I

I

i

---rTR~-;~etion ~~-;ts -$1.3m/month X 9 mos. to be shared by state & !

:--------------I

I

!Testing Costs: fEnvir~mental Qu~ii!Y_____ _f1----sl,oOo:Ooois1Poo:oOOfTAciditional tests at state lab; cost per sample: $26 ~--------- Subtotal Testing: !! $l,OOO,ooor---$l,OOO:ooof l ---------------------;

---------------------- ------~------------·----------------------·-------------------

---n----------,---------------rr-----------------------------------------------------1 --------------------"l! i! : :i
I I I I

I

I

'

I

I

1

!
I

}- ---------:Additional Agency Support·
I

P---1

-I I
I

--4~---------.;...._-----------;.+---------------------------------·-------------~

J

-I -I

I

I

I

I

- -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - -·-

- - - -- -·- I

~------------I

..---------.. :.---------~~ ----------4------- ----4+----------------------------------------------------------~
I I I

::

:

::
J
I

:
I

i :LARA i
I

l !health facilit1es (hospitals, Long Term Care, etc.). i ~-------------------------'-~-·-------·-~-------------------------------------·-------------------------' iMSHDA ii $0; $249,900j i l
I I I I I I

ii I~ ;!

$ i

o: !

$

2001000: I

l !support for plumbing inspectors to do schools (public and parochia l) and
. . .

l

:

!Health&-Human-Services _______ ~n-;:;;ental Quality--------;;

f!

!
I
J J

..--------

5-~btotalAcidrtWS~pp-;rt:

[1

$600,000! $300,000! $900,000!
I
I I

$600,000TTFoiiO;~p-on child;e"O-;tth";i;~t~dbi~-;;~~-------------l

S300,000i !Home and school inspections.
$1,349~;----------------I I
I I I I

----

---------l
-- - - - ]
I
I I

r-------

i---------------------- -----H· - ------i-~+---------------------------------i ALL TOTAL ! j- $7,916,000! $i0,365,900!!·-------------------------------------------------1
·1 II

II

--,---------c--r------------------

---------- ------,

----------------....!-1.----------------------------------------------------

5:52PM 10/7/2015

PRELIMINARY DRAFT

. FliNT SCHOOL TESTING RESULTS: WHAT DID WE FIND? 1) The results of the initial screening conducted over the co urse ofthe last week are consistent w ith t he last round of commu nity lead and copper t esting. 2) There were a total of 37 samples taken from 13 schools. Of t hose 37 samples, 4 exceeded the 15 ppb action level. There were 3 schools that had samples exceeding the action level: Eisenhower Elementary (which had two samples exceeding 15 ppb). Brownell STEM Academy and Freeman Elementary each had one sample exceeding 15 PPI3. The sample from Freeman Academy was significa ntly higher than th e other samples at 101 PP B. 3) Looking at the data from a hea lth based perspective, the data clearly demonstrates that more detailed sampling needs to occur so that the various sources of lead contam ination contained within each respective school's plumbing can be identified and addressed. WHAT DOES THE DATA MEAN? 1} The data underscores the need for a co mplete and thorough evaluation of the plumbing system within each school. 2} We have developed a protocol for eva luating th e plumbing systems and we will be working with schools to implement these protocols and to assist them in determining a corrective action plan to address this issue. 3} The State is identifying staff within DEQ, DHHS, LARA and Local County Health Departments· to assist schools in co ndu cting evaluations of their plumbing systems. WHAT IS YOUR PROTOCOL? 1) DEQ's protocols are based on similar work done in Michigan and in other States. 2) Multiple samples from each tap used for cooking or drinking water will be collected at prescribed intervals to identify levels of lead and its likely source. 3) Once an evaluation is complete, we will be able to assist each School in developing a comprehe nsive plan to address Issues on a site specific basis.

HOW DO SCHOOLS RESPOND? 1} Schools should continu e protective measures that are currently in place until a complete study can be conducted at each school. This includes the continued use of bottled waterfor·consumption purposes. 2) We will be reaching out to schools to schedule a comp lete evaluation, assessment and sampling, of their plumbing systems.

Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in Schools and Child Care Centers
There is no f ederal or Michigan law requiring sampling of drinking water in schools that receive water from other public water systems, although schools that have their own water supply are subject to regulation and sampling as noncommunity public water systems. Schools served by a public water system may be included as a sampling site (i.e., tap) for a public water system's lead and copper monitoring program if there are insufficient single-family hom es that qualify. There are no federal requirements for more extensive testing. The 1986 Am endments to the Safe Drin king Water Act (SDWA) required EPA to develop regulations to control for lead in drinking w ater. The Lead and Copper Rul e (LCR), issued in 1991, is focused on controlling corrosion with in th e distribution system that delivers water to customers. The 1986 SDWA Amendments also required that only lead-free materials be used in new plumbing and in plumbing repa irs. In 1988, the SDWA was further amended by th e Lead Contam ination Control Act (LCCA), to re duce the exposure of lead to children In schools and child care facilities. The LCCA prohibited the sale of any drinking water cooler that is not lea dfree and requi red t hat: o the EPA identify each brand and model of drinking water cooler, indicating which are lead free and which have a leadlined tank and distribute the list to states (SDWA Sec. 1463), o the Consumer Product Safety Commission order that manufacturers and importers of all drinking water coolers identified as having a lead-lined tank repair, replace, or recall and provide a refund for such coolers (SDWA Sec. 1462), o the EPA publish a guidance document and t esting protocol to assist states in determining the source and degree of lead contamination in school drinking water (SDWA Sec. 1464), and o states establish programs to assist schools and child ca re facilities to test for and remedy lead contamination problems, w ith public availa bility of results of such testing (SDWA Sec. 1464(d)). As a result of a 1996 court decision, States are not required to establish testing programs. In its decision, the Fifth Circuit held that provisions in section 1464(d) were unconstitutional un de r the Tenth Amendment t o the U.S. Constitution because they directly compelled the st ate to enact and enforce a federa l regulatory program and provided no options for the State to decline the program. Th e decision did not, however, restrict states from developing and carrying out their own programs to assist schools. In 1989 and subsequent years, EPA released guidance and information to inform states and school systems how to test for and red uce the risk of lead exposure In school drinkin~ water. EPA's guidance provides a protocol for testing water in schools and recommends that schools take action at fixtures where t he lead concentration exceeds 20 ppb. This conce ntration differs from the 15 ppb action level that public w ater systems are required to follow. The 20 ppb action

level is based on a smaller sample collection volume of 250 mill/liters (ml) and is designed to pinpoint specific fountains and outlets that require attention.
In 1990, Michigan did provide schools and licensed child care centers with information to assist in testing and remedying potential lead contamination of their drinking water as requ ired by the Lead Contamination Control Act of 1988. This information included a sampling protocol and guidance on f lushing their system to min imize lead exposure. In 2004, EPA surveyed states to determine what additional programs may exist to control exposure to lead in drinking water at schools and ch ild care ce nters. Forty- nine states, Puerto Rico, t he District of Columbia and th e Navajo Nation responded. On ly 16 respondents Indicated they have or will conduct special sampling or studies to target lead exposure at schools and child care centers. M ichigan has not included any additional sampling programs or studies. However, some local agencies have conducted voluntary programs. For example, the W.l(. Kellogg Foundation fund ed a program implemented by t he Calhoun County Hea lth Department that sam pled schools in Battle Creek. In Michigan's response to this EPA survey, we included a recommendation for EPA to al low schoo ls to be considered as a primary LCR monitoring site so that more information about lead levels in schools wou ld become available. However, no changes in sampling criteria have occu rred to date.

In 2005, a Memora ndum of Understanding was signed between the EPA, the Department of Education, the Centers for Disease Control and Preve ntion (CDC), the America n Water Works Association, the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies, the Association of State Drinking Wate r Administrators, the Nation al Association of Water Companies and the National Rural Water Association to facilitate actions that reduce children's exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child care fa cilities. Across the country and in Michigan, most schools and child care facilities receive water from other community water systems. However, those schools that have their own source of drinking water are considered non-transient noncommunity water systems and are s ubject to the LCR. In Michigan, t here are 755 such schools and child care centers that must mon itor for lead to demonstrate compliance.

Response to Corrosion Control Questions - lime Softening can affect the pH in water -The pH of the water is one physical characteristic that ca n affect the leaching of lead from pipes into the water -As per the requirements in the Lead/Copper rule t he Flint Water system was evaluated for two consect,Jtlve monitoring periods and the results ofthe monitoring demonstrated that further action was necessary. - The DEQ promptly notified the Flint water system of the need for additional measures and the city of Flint promptly began putting together an action plan to address this need.

From: To:

Subject: Date:

SVgo. Jim COEO) ]Jelen. Marv Beth CDEOl; Shaler. Karen CDEO); Wyant. Dan CDEOl Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:00:30 P~1

Summary of advisory committee meeting Sent from my iPhone Begin forwarded message:

From: "Prysby, Mike (DEQ)" <PRYSBYM@michigan.gov> Date: October 7, 2015 at 4:56:44 PM EDT To: "Sygo, Jim (DEQ)" <SygoJ@michigan.gov> Subject: TAC Meeting Highlights Below is a summary of the Flint TAC meeting to obtain the committee1s endorsement to switch back to Detroit water. 1. The TAC endorses the switch back to the DWSD 2. Marc Edwards of VA Tech supports the switchover to DWSD with conclusion that Flint River water with corrosion control will still be 4 times more corrosive than water from DWSD after 5 weeks of treatment. 3. Genesee County states two weeks to prepare pipeline for re-use (flush, disinfect, sample, etc) 4. Supplemental corrosion control still needed with DWSD water and ACT 399 submittal can be made in approx one week. 5. No pros were brought to the table for staying on the Flint River. Sent from my iPhone

City of Flint,

M~ c hi ga n

Third Floor, City Hall 1101 S. Saginaw Street Flint, Michigan 48502 www.cityofflint.com

Meeting Minutes ~ Draft
Monday, March 25, 2013 5:33PM Agenda amended to include Board of Hospital Managers appointments Council Chambers

CITY COUNCIL

Scott Kincaid, President, Ward 9 Bryant W. Nolden, Vice President, Ward 3 Claudia Croom, Ward 1 Jacqueline Pop/at~ Ward 2 Bernard Lawler, Ward 5 Joshua M. Freeman, Ward 4 Sheldon A. Neeley, Ward 6 Dale K. Weigh ill, Ward 7 Michael J. Sarginson, Ward 8 Inez M. Brown, City Clerk

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes -Draft

March 25, 201 3

CALL TO ORDER
President Scott Kincaid called the meeting to order at 5:33p.m.

ROLL CALL
Councilperson Michael Sarginson arrived at 5:37p.m.

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, Kincaid, Councilperson Weighill and Council person Croom

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Counci/person Sheldon Neeley led the Pledge of Allegiance.

SPECIAL ORDER
130217 Special Order/Information & Discussion/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) A Special Order as requested by Council President Scott Kincaid to continue discussion and review of information on the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). Presented

PETITIONS AND UNOFFICIAL COMMUNICATIONS
130193 Change to Digital/All Limited Basic Service Channels/Comcast Cablevislon Communication dated March 6, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: On or shortly after April 9, 2013, Comcast will convert all Limited Basic service channels -- including Public, Government and Educational Access (PEG) channels to digital format, and will provide customers with digital equipment. This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 130199 Certified Letter/Loyst Fletcher, Jr. & Associates Communication received from Loyst Fletcher, Jr. to Chief Legal Officer, re: He questions the tax-exempt status of Word of Life Christian Church, which received a tax bill from the city. This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 130200 Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)mme Square/Ward 3 Local Approval Notice dated March 14, 2013, f rom MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The MLCC has received a request to transfer all stock in 20 12 C lass C license with Sunday Sales Permit (PM) and Dance Permit, located at 4522 N. Saginaw,
City of Flint, Michigan

Page1

Printed on tl/2/2013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes - Dl'aft

Mal'ch 25, 2013

Flint, Michigan, 48505, Genesee County, held by the estate of Myra Seals, Inc., 1028 Cora Dr., Flint, Ml 48532, to Carisa Mays Bishop, Personal Representative. [NOTE: Approval order enclosed.]
This matter w as Placed on File. The motion carried. 130202

Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)/D & R Market, Inc./Ward 6 Local Approval Notice dated March 6, 2013, and received March 15, 2013, from MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The MLCC has received an application from 2 MR, LLC, requesting to Transfer Ownership of a Specially Designated Distributor (SOD) and Specially Designated Merchant (SDM) licensed business with Sunday Sales permit (PM) and Direct Connection-! to D & R Market, Inc., located at 1402-1404 N. Chevrolet, Flint, Michigan, 48504, Genesee County, from 2 MR, LLC, 3079 Shattuck Arms Blvd., Apt. 5, Saginaw, Ml 48603. [NOTE: The application was cancelled pursuant to a request from an attorney.]
This matter w as Placed o n File. The moti on carried.

130204

Changes/Cable Channel Lineup/Comcast Cablevision Communication dated March 18, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: effective on or about May 22, 2013, Fox Business Network/Fox Business Networl< HD (ch. 06/243) will from the Digital Preferred Service to the Digital Starter Service.
This m atter w as Placed on File. The motion carried.

130205

Media Alert/Flint Public Art ProjecVAnnouncement of Design Winner Media Alert received via e-mail on March 19, 20 13, from the American Institute of Architects (AlA) , re: The Flint Public Art Project and the Flint Chapter of the AlA will announce the winner of the $25,000.00 grand prize in the inaugural Flat Lot competition to design and build a temporary summer pavilion on Flint's central downtown parking lot at 9:30a.m. Thursday, March 21, 2013, at the John Gazall & Associates, Matt Building, 503 S. Saginaw Street, Flint.
This m atter was Placed on File. The m otion carried.

130207

Damage Claims MAYFI ELD, LINDA, 2518 Walter Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 2) LANE, WILLIE C., 3130 Concord Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 6)
This matter was Placed on File. Th e motion c an·led.

COMMUNICATIONS FROM CITY OFFICIALS
13 0194

Press Release/City of FlinVHiring of New Police Officers/Recruitment of Others Press Release dated March 11, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public

City of Flint, Michigan

Page2

Printed on 41212013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes - Draft

March 25, 2013

Information Officer, re: The City of Flint has seven new police officers on the job from the public safety millage passed last November by voters. The city's next step is to hold a recruitment drive by working with a local college, which will set up a Police Academy when th e city has gathered sufficient interest from its efforts.
This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 130195

Press Release/City of Flint/Sunday Sales of Alcohol Before Noon Not Permitted on St. Patrick's Day Press Release dated March 12, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public Information Officer, re: The City of Flint will not be able to permit Sunday alcohol sales before noon this Sunday, March 17, St: Patrick's Day. While the city adopted a resolution to allow a one-time exception to the Sunday morning alcohol ban, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission has taken the position that the city cannot create a one-day exemption.
This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried.

130196

Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special City Council Meeting/March 18, 2013 Public Notice posted March 14, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special City Council Meeting, followed by a Finance Committee Meeting, at 5:30 p.m. Monday, March 18, 2013, in th e City Council Chambers, 3rd Floor, City Hall, to consider a contract with the Karegnondi Water Authority ('t<M/A).
This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried.

130201

Emergency Financial Manager (EFM) Ord er #1 0/Grant Applications Order #1 0 issued by Emergency Financial Manager on March 15, 2013, "G rant Applications," re: "all city officials, department heads, division heads and employees shall adhere to ... requirements regarding the approval of any and all grant applications on behalf of th e City of Flint or grant applications submitted by others which in any way involves the financial, programmatic or personnel support by the City of Flint." T he five requirements, including the stipulation that only the Emergency Financial Manager or City Administrator are authorized to accept grants on behalf of th e city, are included in the order.
This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried.

130203

Press Release/City of Flint/Flint Lifelines/Meeting Announcement Press Release dated March 16, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public Information Officer, re: Flint Lifelines, formerly CeaseFire Flint, will hold community meetings on th e fourth Thursday of each month, beginning at 1 p.m. Thursday, March 28, 2013 at Flint Northwestern High School. The meetings are open to the public.
This matter was Placed on File. Th e motion carried.

City of Flint, Mfcll/gan

Page3

Printed on 4/212013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes - Draft

March 2!i, 2013

130206

Flint City Council/Public Notice/Finance Committee Meeting/March 20, 2013 Public Notice posted March 19,2013 , re: The Flint City Council will hold a Finance Committee Meeting at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, March 20, 2013, in the City Council Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall.
This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried.

130208

Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special Affairs Committee Meeting/March 25, 201 3 Public Notice posted March 22, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special Affairs Committee Meeting at 5 p.m. Monday, March 25, 2013, in the City Council Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall. A regular City Council meeting will immediately follow in the Council Chambers.
This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried.

130209

Traffic Engineering/Note for Bulletin/Street-Sidewalk-Lane Closures Notes for Bulletin (3) dated February/March 2013, for street, sidewalk, or lane closures, re: (1) Harrison Street, Saginaw Street and Second Avenue (cable failure-March 11-March 20); (2) First Street, Harrison Street, W allenberg, Kearsley, Crapo, Horrigan, and Harrison (St. Patrick's Day Pot 0' Gold 4-Mil Run/Walk-March 17); and (3) Chevrolet Avenue (University Corner Grand Opening-March 22) .
This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried.

Passed The Consent Agenda
A motion was m ade. The motion carried.

PUBLIC SPEAKERS ROLL CALL
Councilperson Dale Weighillleft at approximately 7 p.m.
Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Counciiperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarglnson, Kincaid and Councilperson Croom Absent: Council person: Councilperson Weighill

APPOINTMENTS
130169.1

Amendment/Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Christine Monk (Ward 6) Amended resolution resolving that th e Flint City Council recommends th e reappointment of Christine Monk (821 Frank Street, Flint Ml 48504- W ard 6), to th e Zoning Board of Appeals for a three-year term, commencing September

City of Flillf, Michigan

Page 4

Printed on 41212013

CITY COUNCIL

IVleeting Minutes - Draft

March 25, 2013

1, 2011, and expiring September 1, 2014. [By way of background, Ms. Monk's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals expired in September 2011, but she has continued since that t ime to serve.] [Resolution amended to fix typographical error in first paragraph of resolution from "Board of Review" to "Zoning Board of Appeals."]
Sponsors:

Sheldon A. Neeley

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Councilperson Weighill

Absent: 130211

Appointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Chris Zuwala (Ward 4) Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of Chris Zuwala (351 0 Whittier Avenue, Flint Ml 48506- Ward 4) to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a three-year term , expiring September 1, 2013. [NOTE: By way of backg round , Gloria Kelly's term as the 4th Ward representative expired in September 2007, but she continued to serve until resigning in January 2013.)
Sponsors:

Joshua M. Freeman

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councllperson Poplar, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8- Council person Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Councilperson Weighifl

Absent: 130212

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Birdie V. Brooks (Ward 5) Resolution resolving that th e Flint City Council recommends th e reappointment of Birdie V. Brooks (1307 Columbia Lane, Flint Ml 48503 -Ward 5), to the Zoning Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term , expiring September 1, 2014. [By way of background, Ms . Brook's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals expired in September 2011, but she has continued since that time to serve.]
Sponsors:

Bernard Lawler

A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Councilperson Neeley, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8- Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Councilperson Weighill

Absent: 130213
City of Flint, Michigan

PageG

Printed on 41212013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes -Draft

March 25, 2013

Resolution resolving th at the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of Marcia Braden (984 Barney Avenue, Flint Ml 48503 -Ward 8), to the Zoning Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1, 2014. [By way of background, Ms. Braden's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals expired in September 2011 , but she has continued since that time to serve.]
Sponsors:

Michael J. Sarginson

A motion was made by Councilperson Sarginson, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8- Council person Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Counciiperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President l<incaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Counciiperson Weighill

Absent: 130214

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/David C. Veasley (Ward 9) Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of David C. Veasley (2618 Pinetree Drive, Flint Ml 48507 - Ward 9), to the Zoning Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1, 2015. [By way of background, Mr. Veasley's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals expired in September 2009, but he has continued since that time to serve.]
Sponsors:

Scott Kincaid

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Counciiperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councllperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Counciiperson Weigh ill

Absent: 130215

Appointment/Genesee County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council/Anthony Tucker (Ward 4) Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of Anthony Tucker (2960 Henry Street, Flint Ml 48506 - Ward 4) to the Genesee County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council for t he remai nder of a three-year term, expiring in January 2016. [NOTE: By way of background, Dan Anderson's term as the 4th Ward representative expired in January 2013.]
Sponsors:

Joshua M. Freeman

A motion was made by Council person Freeman, seconded by Council person Poplar, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarglnson, President l<incaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Councilperson Weighill
Page6 Printed on4/212013

Absent:
City of Flint, Michigan

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes - Draft

March 25, 2013

130218

Reappointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Philip W. Shaltz Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the reappointment of Philip W. Shaltz (14144 Moffet Drive, Fenton, Ml48430) to an additional five-year term on the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 2013, and expire April30, 2018.
A motion was made by Council person Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, that this matter· be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President l<incaid and Councilperson Croom Councilperson Weighill

Absent:

1-

130219

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Delrico Loyd Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Delrico Loyd (2641 Westwood Parkway, Flint, Ml48507) to a five-year term on the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 201 3, and expire April 30, 2018. [By way of background, Carl E. Mason was appointed in June 2008; his term expires April 30, 2013.]
Approved Substituted A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Lawler·, that this matter be POSTPONED for March 27, 2013. The motion failed by the following vote: Aye: No: Absent: 35Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarglnson Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Presidenll<incaid and Councilperson Croom

1 - Councilperson Weighill

Substituted A motion was made by Vice President No lden, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: No: Absent: 531Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, President l<incaid and Councllperson Croom Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson Councilperson Weighiil

130220

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Donna Poplar Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Donna Popl9r (5277 Kimberly Woods Circle, Flint, Ml 48504) to a five-year term

City of Flin t, Michigan

Page7

Printed on 41212013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes - Draft

March 25, 2013

on the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 2013, and expire April 30, 2018. [By way of background, Frances Gilcreast was appointed in August 2008; her term expires April 30, 2013.]
Approved Substituted A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Council person Neeley, that this matter be POSTPONED for March 26, 2013. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 7- Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Councilperson Freeman 1 - Councilperson Weighill

No: Absent:

RESOLUTIONS
130165.1

Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (I<M/A) to purchase fifteen (15) units of capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the I<M/A an estimated amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it is expected that continu ing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to $1 .9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution amended from 18 to 15 units of capacity.]

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: No: Absent: 130165.2 5- Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 3 · Councilperson Poplar, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 1 - Councilperson Weighill

Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a contract with Karegnondl Water Authority (KWA) to purchase sixteen (16) units

City of Flint, Michigan

Pnge8

Printed on 41212013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes - Draft

March 25, 2013

of capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide fWVA information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal Officer, to make minor (non-material} modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the fWVA not less than $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the fWVA an estimated amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to $1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution amended from 15 to 16 units of capacity.]

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 7Councilperson Poplar, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councllperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom

No: Absent: 130216

1 - Vice President Nolden 1 - Council person Weighill

Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint Resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the DDA, in accordance with Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, and approved The Rules Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been amended and revised at various times since then, which required the proposed changes.] [NOTE: The First Amendment & Restated Ru les Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.]
A motion w as made by Councllperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, that this matter be Amended , The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom Councilperson Weighill

Absent: 130216.1

1-

Amended Resolution/Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint Amended resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the DDA, in accordance with Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, and approved The Rules Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been

City of Flint, M/clllgan

Page9

Printed on 412/2013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes - Draft

March 25, 2013

amended and revised at various times since then, which required the proposed changes.] [NOTE: The First Amendment & Restated Ru les Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.] [Resolution amended for changes to rules.]
A motion was made by Council person Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councllperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom

Absent:

1 - Councilperson Weighill

RESOLUTIONS - MAY BE REFERRED FROM S.A.
130210

Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment of Transition Advisory Board Resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council request and recommend to Gov. Riel< Snyder that a receivership transition advisory board be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1, 2013. [NOTE: On December 1, 2011, Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the City of Flint, due in part to a consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in pooled cash, budget issues and unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. Due to the suspension and subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder appointed Edward J. Kurtz as Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 for the City of Flint, effective August 9, 2012. Both the Emergency Manager and the subsequently appointed Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by virtue of their appointment to "act for and in the place and stead of the governing body and the office of chief administrative officer of the City of Flint." On March 28, 2013, Public Act 436 will become effective and provides that an emergency financial manager appointed and serving under state law immediately prior to the effective date shall continue to serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 436. As an alternative to continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial emergency has been rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a receivership transition advisory board, which seNes at the pleasure of the governor and monitors the affairs of the local government until the receivership is terminated.]

No vole was taken on this amendment.
Amended 130210.1

Amended Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment of Transition Advisory Board Amended resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council request and recommend to Gov. Rick Snyder that a receivership transition advisory board be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1, 2013. [NOTE: On December 1, 2011, Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the

City of Flint, Michigan

Page 10

Printed on41212013

CITY COUNCIL

Meeting Minutes · Draft

March 25, 2013

City of Flint, due in part to a consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in pooled cash, budget issues and unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. Due to the suspension and subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder appointed Edward J. Kurtz as Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 for the City of Flint, effective August 9, 2012. Both the Emergency Manager and the subseq uently appointed Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by virtue of their appointment to "act for and in the place and stead of the governing body and the office of chief administrative officer of the City of Flint." On March 28, 2013, Public Act 436 will become effective and provides that an emergency financial manager appointed and serving under state law immediately prior to the effective date shall continue to serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 436. As an alternative to continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial emergency has been rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a receivership transition advisory board, which serves at the pleasure of the governor and monitors the affairs of the local government until the receivership is terminated.] [Six-page resolution amended for changes proposed by City Council, City Clerk and Mayor Dayne Walling.] ·

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote:
Aye: 8Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councllperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and Councllperson Croom

Absent:

1 - Councilperson Weighill

MEETING SCHEDULE ADDITIONAL COUNCIL DISCUSSION ADJOURNMENT
Having no further business, Council President Scott Kincaid adjourned file meeting at 8:59 p.m. Respectfully transcribed and submitted, Janel/ Johnson. Administrative Secretarv to Citv Council

City of Flint, Mlc iJ/yan

Page ·11

Printed on4/212013

EM SUBMISSION NO. :

/20!32. /)? CJ '-// P:RESENTED:_ _ 3_. _;L . _ f!_ ... _ J3 __

ADOPTED:~~3~ ---J<. _9_,._1._~_
BY TliE EMERGENCY MANAGER: RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACl'l'Y FROM ICAREGNONDI WATER AUTIIOlUTY

The Kuregn.ondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and co1.mties in s_ outheastern Michigan that was created to build u water pipeline that will pl'ovide water :fi·om Lake Huron to interested communities in Sat1ilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. The incorporating bodies that Cl'eated the KWA are Sanilac County, La!lCCl' County, Genesee County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. The City of Flint is currently :in a year to yeat· contmct with the City of Detroit fol' the purchase of wntel'. A study was conducted thftt projected that staying wlth Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 yeru; }Jeriod, the projected cos~s would be less theu25% of the projected water costs from Detroit.

. . ._- :.": _ :;·:~: ~. :·.·:i:.:;-; ~·:(~::~~~~~i.~~:.~~lil~. t11~ ~)~p·~~i~~~·· iil~-~i~X~~~,~~--c~~~11~~~:l~ ~~m· ~is .~~~ber~· ~:~~~~~~~~- :-~. :~ ::;'; ;··: ::\\:;;_
·the capacity that edch membet' wlll put'chuse it1 the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw. 85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity js available to members·]n increments of 1 million gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that n member-purchases, the buyer shAll pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the K.WA uot less then $32,300.00 per unit per yeanmtil such time as water is made available to the buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not to exceed $355.300.00 per unit pex y0ar 1.111til such time that the bonds are paid in ft!ll. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyet· has a right to cancel the contract. T.he purchase of capacity along with the payment of oth.el' costs necessary to operate the pipeline gives the member a l'ight to water for sale to its 011stomers. The buyer has a light to resell .capacity and watel' l'ights. Each pnrty entering into a oapnclty contract shall also be entitled to appoint additional board members eq\la1 to the party's percentage share of the total capacity under contract.
It is in the long term best interests of the City of Flint to enter into a contract with the

··,;.;

KWA to purchase up to eighteen (18) 1.1nits of capacity.

IT lS RESOLVED thnt City officials are authorized to enter into n contract with KWA to purchase up to eighteen (1 8) units of cnpncity.

rr IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City· Admlnistmtor· is authorized to· provide KWA infot·mntion needed to administer the contract and, with approval of the Chief Legal Officet·, to make minor (non-material) modificntions to the contract. ·
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
APPROVED AS TO FINANCE:

fZ>rGerald Ambl'osc, Fin:mcc Dil'cctor

ENACT.

1/

FAIL _ __ _ _

DATED

,.1"'" :J.-[ .--j:J

·:·.::i .::.::; ~i~:w.. ... n.~,d~\~.M.~n~. :~\;~~~h.;.l.iP.u~~~\~A.m.~,~,J3,Mo ·...-:.. ·~;·,': .': i,-;. . :~· . .< · .' ;·: . ~ · .· : .·..· . :: ·. ..:: .: ~ :: ·..:.. _, :.: ·, ·:.:· . i: <>.:.:··~:·;·.;:,;:;:::/~·.;·~·:.: .:;~:_.: : :: <·+~··.~J ..; .. ···i··· · ··

'

·

I

.···.· ...
\

folint City Council appl'oves resolution to buy water from Karegnoncli, state approval still ... Page 1 of2

Flinl

Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water
frQIJ;l_~ar~g~t~n~(li, &~~-t~__ a.pprQva.l_~tiU_ :o.~~d~.d __
. I'!)
:fflf.~-\

' ·· <r.··. on Matell25, 2013 at10:~G PM, updntod Maccll26, ?.013at1:23AM

Dlllp://aonuoot.mllvo,oom/slall/dadams1/lndex.hlml) fly llomlnlo Adams 1dudams6@1l111Yo.com [hllp://connoct.mllvo.com/slallldadarns1/posts.htmiJ Follow on TwHtor [http://V(I'IW.lWIItor.comtuomlntcad~ms]

FLINT, MI- Flint is one stop closer to getting its water from Lak~ Hmon as pmt of the Karegnondi Water Authority, The vote1 approved 7-111t the Flint City Cotmcll meeting Monday, Mal'eh 25 [http:/fwww.mlivo.comfnewsjflint/index,ssf/2o18/03/flint_city_council_ngaln_dellly.html], may have set in motion the end to Flint pa~-lng to get Its watet· from Detroit. Under the proposal, Flint would get 16 million gallons per day of rawwatel'from Lake Huron, pipe it to Flint for treatment and then sell it to customers throughout the city. Another 2 million gallons per day would come from the Flint River and will be treated In Flint. Mayor Dayu.e Walling said the Depa1tment of Enviromnental Quality must approve Flint's getting 2 million gallons pet· day from the Flint River. 'fuesday's meeting followed weel<s of cliscusslons and special meetings surrounding the resolution. "We got there," Councihnan Joshua Freeman said. "That's the impottant thing." There were more thun 50 people at Monday's meeting.

:\~\ (~:!;q<;Jil)!?.''?i\h K!!r!l&I)~!JI.Ii.!~ the ~.est geci_~iqn, Wehavono.opinion on !he economics of\1:~ ~~cision/' said Rebecca F.~~ewa, Fli~~ Rh:~r .: :· :;::.--~\.-\::·:;)_:N·· -:; :::':~'Watershed Coalition executive director. "Ifwe start drawing water out ofthe l1Jint Rivet~ we are at risk of having to start releasing water

· ·-·· ' · · · · ··.;·:;',:

from out· reservoirs."
Gcucsce County brnin Commissioner JcffWright said the decision must still be approved by a county water and wru~te ad\~sory board. The KWA board \\111 then be reconvened for final approval.

Wl'ight said consttUction could start In May. State treasury officials still must approve the city council's move because Flint has an emergency financial manage1·. All expenditures over $5o,ooo must be approved.

Genesee County Dmin Commissioner JeffWrlght has sold that Flint would pay roughly $6.4 million annually for water service if itjolned the pipellne -a nem·ly $4 million savings on what it pays Detroit for water. Walling l>reviously said the city would SllVe $19million over eightyem·s [http://www.mlivc.com/news/flintfindex,ssf/2ol3/ 03/flint_city_comlciLdelnys_dcci.htrnl] by getting water from the KWA.
''It's a histot·lc night in tho Cily of Flint/' Walling said. "The savings will be less I 11th the capacity level approved by cit>· council because there will be increased treatment cost for the rivenvate1·."

He snid the DEQ told the city it needed to get 18lllill!on gallons pel' duyorthere would have to be additional work done nt Flint's w11tcr plant.
Flint's water plant nnd the Flint River is cm·rently the hllcl<Up fo1· Flint and Genesee County, however, the plant only operates four times peryeal',

Councilman Btyant Nolden wa~ the lone dissenting vote.

http ://www.mlive.com/news/:flint/index.ssi120 13/03/flint_cit;r_council_approves_re.html

10/7/2015

Flint City Co\mcll approves resoh1tion to buy water fi·om Karegnondi, state approval still ... Page 2 of 2
''Itwas a protest wtc," Nolden said. "I lmew the)' had eno\tgh votes. I just feel like the Flint River is our best option," Karengnondi is the regional walet· authority that includes Genesee, Lapcet· and Sanilac counties and tlte cities of Flint And Lapeer. Flint is the second municipality, behht<l Genesee County, to officinlly decide to purchase raw wntet· through the KWA. Lapeet' city officials said they intend to purchase water, but an agreement has been finalized.
Domil!ioAclams is a reportm·jol· MLive-FliutJOllJ'IIal. Contact him at claclamss@mliva.com Ol' 810-R41-8Bos. Follow /lim on I·'ccccbool~ [htt]n/jwwwJ'accb ook.comjdomin ic.admns.186s] Ol' .GcioJ]ze:l. [11 tt_ J)s"i/jp1ull.gob{Jle;c6m/.t686 9 667::Z5668687£99i1?J·eT,.,ciiithcil'l · .

7'vitte1· [ftttp:jjwww. twitteJ·, co mjdominic«dmns],

- Rclntcd Stories
Price of Detroit water for Flint is $1.5 million a month, mayor says
~~r~--:·-c.-~1§

~~

.,....,.,,.Q~"'

;-.;;'<;=-· -,. (~11~.

Here's how that toxic lead gats into Fllnl water

lhUp:/Jwww.mlive.com/nawsminVindex.ssf/2016/1 0/rnayor_clly_a (hUp:/lwww.mlive.CQm/newslfllnVIndex.ssff2015/1 Ofsee_step_by_s
Regls~atlon on
@ 2016

or usa of this silo constitutes aoceplence or our User Agroomont and Privaoy Polioy-

Mllvo Modln Group Nl rights reserved {About Us]. The ntatortal on lllis site may not bo roproducod, dlsWbuted, transn~lled, tachod or oUlol\liso usod, oxcopl 1·~lh tho prtorwrltten pormlsslon or ~lllve ModlaGroup Community fiuJos apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to lhls silo, Contactlnloractivily management.
(:> A<l Choices

:.

:: ....... ~ .

. .. ; '· .: ..._\: ._. ... .:. ::·.:--::;·:·:·:· '; ;_ ::\~~~:

·

·

·

·

:

·

~.

':

·

;\

l

··

~

··

http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/20 13/03/:flint_city_council_approves_re.html

10/7/2015

GENESEE COUNTY DRAIN COMIVIISSIONER'S OFFICE
JEFFREY WRIGHT COMMISSIONER
G·4608 BEECHER ROAD, FLINT, Ml ~lJ532'

PHONE {010) 732·1690 f!AX (010) 732·1474

f-OR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

CONTACT: Jeff Wright
810-287-1925

March 2.6, 2013

What: Jeff Wright Statement on Flint City Council Approving Resolution to Join KWA.
When: March 26, 2013

Additional Info: Jeff Wright, CEO of the KWA, today praised the Flint City Council for voting to approve a resolution to officially have the City of Flint join the KWA and Its' water line.

._ ;_ :·} .::·..\·<~~:~l9.~~t~ .~.f .r,t~r:~t~~-f~,~~~~.~9..h.~~.¢ .t~~ir.Y!?.I~~s. ~~.q~~-yi.~ .tJv~lr el.~~t~~ ,C?ffic;!-~,1~.:'~ :!~~f.-.r~~:~ ~-~~:~..'_~}!).~:: ~--~. .:··,. :, .;..-: <~: ·~:,;:,;-y
'·: · ·· · process will c~~~--~.itl) .~.!~~- KY'{~..Board executrng the ~;ontract for the City. . =-. . '· · ··. , ': ~=.:·. :·: .>. ·.: :-,

"I have said from the beginning that this decision must be made by Flint's City Council and Mayor," said Wright. 1'1 appreci.ate the.councH voting the way they did, bttt even more than that, I am glad the

... .·.

·.. ... : ' .·. .

·. · · ·... ··· · ·

·. =.;_:-,' :\ ...
~:

"The most Important aspect from the vote Is the fact that we as an Authority can move forward knowing Flint' s h'ltentlon·s," said Wright. Despite Emergency Manager Ed Kurtz. publicly supporting the project, Wright had made a vote by council a condition of Flint joining the KWA so the residents would have their say. "There Is a baste tenet that government is best when it has focal control. We saw that with the council vote. Nobody, whether they live In Flint, Grand Blanc, Davison, Fenton, or anywhere in Genesee county, should have these types of decisions made by people who live outside of their community," said Wright. At the next Water and Waste Advisory Board meeting a vote will be taken to award a contract for construction of the Intake portion of the water line. All bids were submitted to the board at their last meeting for review.

89 (flov. 02·11)

~mr ~
STATE OF MlCHIGAN

RICK SNYDER
GOV!lRNOR

DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
LANSING

ANDY DILLON
SlATE TREASURl ':R

Mr. Edward Kurtz. Emergency Manager City ofFllnt 1101 South Saginaw Street Flint, MI 48502
Dear Mt·. Klll'IZ: Thauk yon for your March 29, 2013 letter, which is attached for reference. As the Emergency Manager for the City of Flint ("Flint" or "City"), you have asked for my concurrence, pursuant to Public Act 436 of20 12, the Local Financial Stability and Choice Act, to authorize a contract in eKcess of$50,000.00 not subject to competitive bldding. This request was related to the City entering into an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) for provision of raw water for the City. In considel'ing your request, I took note ofthe following facts in suppol't ofFilntjoining KW A. .. First, there is widespread s1.1pport in the City for this move, including the support of the Mayor, :. · :' ·:. :.·:;_ ·..\.": ·i-..-\:;. . . ·.. . .:_t~e City Co·uncil, and the Emergency Manager. Second, this t~WY.~.wi}l provide~ unique ;:::,.::-.:< ·.:. ::::.OPPQl'l\.mi.ty fpr..the. City ~.l~9.C~~mty tp pm:t.ner_on..an impol'ta~.t prpj~9t, which.will hopefu.lly lead .::i·.<': ;.};.} {-:,::</{ ·. ;·':::_:\:_:.:<'to future regional collaboration. ·Third, 'the Depat'tment of Environmental Quality is supportive of ·. ·.::::.:;·'··.:s·~ >··(· the City participating in the KWA project. Finally, your representations that this deal will lead to ·.: ·· ··:: substantial savings for the City over the coming decades, savings that are desperately needed to help with the tumaround of the City of Flint.
It is my understanding that the Detroit Water and Sewer Depa1iment is making a final best offer to Genesee County and the City of Flint next Monday, April15, 2013. As s·nch, this approval will be effective Rt 5 pm on April16, 2013 after receiving written notice from the City that eithel' no such offer was presented to the county and the City or that an offer was received and was
r~j ected

in good faith based upon specified o~jections.

For the reasons described above and subject to the conditions set forth herein, pursuant to Section 12 (3) ofPA 436 of2012, I am authorizing you to proceed with adopting the resolution and entel'lng into a contract with KWA.

itia/L_
Andy Dillon
State

~

P.O. BOX a0716 · LANSING, MICiiiGAN 4U009 www.michlglln.gov/rreasvry · (fi17)3"f 3-32.0U

Flint council supports buying water from Lake l-Imon tlll'O"llgh KWA 1 MLive.com

Page 1 of 1

Fllnl

Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron fhr.o"Q..glt. I~WA
'. r_;,
·

,(tOJ.; 1

''·'·

lhUp:l/connocf.mllvo.com/$l3lf/d~dams1 /lndox,html] By Domlnlo Ad~JT1$J dadams~@mllvo.oom(hUp:l/connocl.mllvo,com/stnH/dadams11posls.hlmlj Follow on TwiUor (htlp:l/www.twltlor.comldomlnlcadamsJ on Marth 26,2013 ot 7:17PM, updated March 26,2013 a17:~3 AM

FLINT, MI --Flint residents muysoon get their watcl'from T.al<c Huron. 'rho Flint City Council voted 7-:i to get 16 mltllon gallons per day from the Karegnondl Water Auth011ly. ''This Is about compromise," said Councilman Sheldon Neeley.
Neeley got support from Councilman .Joshua llreelllan, after the two were }Jt"e,~ously at odds about the amount the city should withdraw from Lake Huron.

Councilman Dryant Nolden was the lone "no" vote. "It was a protest vote," Nolden said. "I just feel like the Flint lliver is om· best option." Genesee County Drain Commissioner said constrnctlon of tho plpellne couldstartltt May,

;,)/·.~:;};:;;:~~~~~:~t:}~~l~~?.;:~~~~=~·~.~~Li:\~.tt:~·!Y;?~.~~~:~~·:· :·.:·, : .:·,- .,:::~·\·:;\:~;;\};.. ~~>·.. :; ,·~.:.;·i·,~: :i,~\.::". :.'·;; ~·. .::·::.:·:·;.; : .·;:;. ::.,:-,:.{;.·::. :.,.:}:-:":.:,. ;:.:; ~:{:>:~; .: ./.:~~;~
= , '

. ·:.-::;·~tn}~:~l:<)llstt!Y <?ffl.~lals slill.must.appl'Q\'6 \he city CO\UlCII's move because Flint has an emergency financial manager. All expenditures Q\'61'. ·\ := .\:-.:.;·.:.::~;.; $so,ooo must be appro1·ed. · :,
.DominicA dams is a rcportcrftw MLivc-FlintJoui'Jial. Coutncthim atiladams5@mli1Je.com Ol' 810-241-88os. Follow him 011 Twitte~· [http://lOIIJW. twitteJ·.comfdominicadams], Faceba ok 111 ttp:/jwww.faccbooT<ocomfdomi1lio,ndams.;t865] 01'
Google+ [https:ffpTus.googlc.cozn/.1.036906725068oB729911?J'el=«ut1!ol:].

Rclntcd Stol'ies
Enbridge can begin piping tar sands oil along Lake Ontario north shore Fonner Detroit American Motors Corp. headquarter$ being auctioned; starting bid $600

[hllp://www.mllve.com/news/lndex.ssf/2015/1 O/enbridge_can_beg [hllp://www.mlive.com/news/detroiVIndex.ssf/2016/1 0/former_detrr
Regls!taUon on or use or U rls sHe oonsUtu!os aoceptanco of our Us or llgroomonl and Privacy Polley
E:> 2015 Mllve Medin Group All rlohts rcsorvocl (I\bout Us).

The material on lllls silo moy nol ~o roproduced, dlsllibulod, tcansn~llled, cacltod orotho~\{se used, excepii'Aih U te prior WT1tlon pormlss!on of Mllvo f,lodla Group
Commun!ly Rules apply to ~II conlonl you upload or otllerwls&submll to litis site. Contact lntorMtlvlty management.
(:> 1\d Oholcos

http://www .mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/20 13/03/flint_city_council_agt:~in_delay .html

10/7/2015

Resolution: Presented: Adopted:

130165.2 3-11-13 3-25-13

AMENDED RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY FROM KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY BY THE MAYOR:
The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer.
CO\mti~s

.

.

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the region $2 ..1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit.

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment :fi:om its members regarding the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity i~ available to members in increments of 1 million gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the ICWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds aJe paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the contract.
The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party's percentage share of the total capacity under contract. The City of Flint has decided that it is in its long term best interests to enter into a contract with the KWA to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity; plus TWO (2) units from the Flint River.

IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from the Flint River. IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA infonnation needed to administer the contract and, with approval of the Chief Legal Officer, to make minol' (non-material) modificatlons to the contract.

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

APPROVED AS TO FINANCE:

Gerald Ambrose Finance Director

APPROVED BY MAYOR:

APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL ON: March 25,2013

~ ~ -)?! .;:j~
Dayne Walling Mayor

Inez Brown(} Clerk, City of Flint

APPROVED BY
CITY COUNCIL

S:\Jl'\Ordillmlccs nnd Ucsos\KWA.03.08.13.doc

ct£r···

MAR 2 5 2013

Response to Corrosion Control Questions -Lime Softening can affect the pH in wate r - The pH of the water is one physical characte ristic t hat can affect the leaching of lead from pi pes into the water -As per the requirements in t he Lead/Copper rule the Flint Water system was evaluated for two consecutive monitoring periods and the results of t he monitoring demonstrated that further action was necessary. - The DEQ promptly notified th e Flint water system of the need for additional measures and the city of Flint promptly began putting together an. action plan to address this need .

Drinldng Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in Sc/Joo/s and Child Care Centers There is no federal or Michigan law req uiring sampling of drin l< ing water in schools that receive water from other public water systems, although schools that have their own water supply are subject to reg ulation and sam pling as non-community public water systems. Schools served by a public water system may be included as a sampling site (i.e. , tap) for a public water system's lead and copper monitoring program if there are insufficient single-family homes that qualify. There are no federal requirements for more extensive testing. The 1986 Amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) required EPA to develop regulations to control for lead in drinking water. The Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) , issued in 1991, is focused on controlling corrosion within the distribution system that delivers water to customers. The 1986 SDWA Amendments also required that only lead-free materi als be used in new plumbing and in plumbing repairs. In 1988, the SDWA was further amended by the Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA), to reduce the exposure of lead to children in schools and child care facilities. The LCCA prohibited the sale of any drinking water cooler that is not lead-free and required that: ·the EPA identify each brand and model of drinking water cooler, indicating which are lead free and which have a lead-lined tank and distribute the list to states (SDWA Sec. 1463), · the Consumer Product Safety Commission order that manufacturers and importers of all drinking water coolers identified as having a lead-lined tank repair, replace, or recall and provide a refund for such coolers (SDWA Sec. 1462), · the EPA publish a guidance document and testing protocol to assist states in determining the source and degree of lead contamination in school drinking water (SDWA Sec. 1464), and · states establish programs to assist schools and child care facilities to test for and remedy lead contamination problems, with public availability of results of such testing (SDWA Sec. 1464(d)). As a result of a 1996 court decision, States are not required to establish testing programs. In its decision, the Fifth Circuit held that provisions in section 1464(d) were unconstitutional under the Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution because they directly compelled the state to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program and provided no options for the State to decline the program. The decision did not, however, restrict states from developing and carrying out their own programs to assist schools. In 1989 and subsequent years, EPA released guidance and information to inform states and school systems how to test for and reduce th e risk of lead exposure in school drinking water. EPA's guidance provides a protocol for testing water in schools and recommends that schools tal<e action at fixtures where the lead concentration exceeds 20 ppb. This concentration differs from the 15 ppb action level that public water systems are required to follow. The 20 ppb action level is based on a smaller sample collection volume of

250 milliliters (ml) and is designed to pinpoint specific fountains and outlets that require attention.
In 1990, Michigan did provide schools and licensed child care centers with information to assist in testing and remedying potential lead contamination of their drinking water as required by the Lead Contamination Control Act of 1988. This information included a sampling protocol and guidance on flushing their system to minimize lead exposure. In 2004, EPA surveyed states to determine what additional programs may exist to control exposure to lead in drinking water at schools and child care centers. Forty-nine states, Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia and the Navajo Nation responded. Only 16 respondents indicated they have or will conduct special sampling or studies to target lead exposure at schools and child care centers. Michigan has not included any additional sampling programs or studies. However, some local agencies have conducted voluntary programs. For example, the W.K. Kellogg Foundation funded a prog ram implemented by the Calhoun County Health Department that sampled schools in Battle Creel<. In Michigan's response to this EPA survey, we included a recommendation for EPA to allow schools to be considered as a primary LCR monitoring site so that more information about lead levels in schools would become available. However, no changes in sampling criteria have occurred to date.

In 2005, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between tile EPA, the Department of Education, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the American Water Worl<s Association, the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies, the Association of State Drinl<ing Water Administrators, the National Association of Water Companies and the National Rural Water Association to facilitate actions that reduce children's exposure to lead from drinl<ing water at schools and child care facilities. Across the country and in Michigan, most schools and child care facilities receive water from other community water systems. However, those schools that have their own source of drinl<ing water are considered nontransient non-community water systems and are subject to the LCR. In Michigan, there are 755 such schools and child care centers that must monitor for lead to demonstrate compliance.

FLINT SCHOOL TESTING RESULTS: WHAT DID WE FIND? 1) The results of the initial screening conducted over the course of the last week are consistent with the last round of community lead and copper testing. 2) There were a total of 37 samples taken from 13 schools. Of those 37 samples, 4 exceeded the 15 ppb action level. There were 3 schools that had samples exceeding the action level: Eisenhower Elementary (which had two samples exceeding 15 ppb). Brownell STEM .Acad emy and Freeman Elementary each had one sample exceeding 15 PPB. The sample from Freeman Academy was significantly higher than the other samples at 101 PPB. 3) Looking at the data from a health based perspective, the data clearly demonstrates that more detailed sampling needs to occur so that the various sources of lead contamination contained within each respective school's plumbing can be identified and addressed.

WHAT DOES THE DATA MEAN? 1) The data underscores the need for a complete and thorough evaluation of the plumbing system within each school. 2) We have developed a protocol for evaluating the plumbing systems and we will be working with schools to implement these protocols and to assist them in determining a corrective action plan to address this issue. 3) The State is identifying staff within DEQ, DHHS, LARA and Local County Health Departments to assist schools in conducting evaluations oftheir plumbing systems.

WHAT IS YOUR PROTOCOL? 1) DEQ's protocols are based on similar work done in Michigan and in other States. 2) Multiple samples from each tap used for cooking or drinking water will be collected at prescribed intervals to identify levels of lead and its likely source. 3) Once an eva luation is complete, we will be able to assist each School in developing a comprehensive plan to address issues on a site specific basis.

HOW DO SCHOOLS RESPOND?

1} Schools should continue protective measures that are current ly in place until a complete study can be conducted at each school. This includes the continued use of bottled water for consumpt ion purposes. 2} We will be reaching out to schools to schedule a complete evaluation, assessment and sam pling, of their plumbing systems.

From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Sent: Tuesday, October 13, 2015 3:51 PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Calley, Brian {GOV) (GOV) <clem ente@mic - :. ' Subject: FW: flint documents

.

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth

FYI. For your background. From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) Sent: Tuesday, October 13, 2015 10:02 AM To: Muchmore, Dennis {GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Saxton, Thom as (Treasury) <SaxtonT@mlchigan.gov> Subject: FW: flint documents Here is the Interim report from February also Wayne L. Workman Deputy State Treasurer Michigan Department of Treasury From: Dempl<owsl<i, Angela (Treasury) Sent: Tuesday, October 13, 2015 9:49AM To: Workm an, Wayne (TREASURY) <WorkmanW@michigan.gov> Subject: flint documents Randy asked me to get these to you to give to Dennis Muchmore. Angela Dempkowski Senior Executive Management Assistant Department ofTreasury From: Ducat, Penny (Treasury) Sent: Tuesday, October 13, 2015 9:43 AM To: Dempkowsl<i, Angela (Treasury) <Dempl<owskiA@michigan.gov> Subject: scan

1

Bureau of Local Government 430 W . Allegan Lansing, Ml 48922 · ail:

2

G)veouA

G)veouA

FROM
Veolla North America

, TO
Emergency Manager Gerald Ambrose

Executive Summary
The City of Flint changed water sources, transltlonlng from Detroit's system to the Flint River. This change created water treatment challenges that have resulted in water quality violations. Aging cast-iron pipe has compounded the situation, leading to aesthetic Issues including taste, odor and discoloration. Public Interest and scrutiny of the drinking water system intensified following the distribution of required public notices of violation. The City of Flint has made a number or good decisions regarding treatment changes that have Improved water quality. However, this Is a very complex water quality issue and the City is seeking additional advice on what to do to ensure healthful drinking water for the community. · Veolla appreciates the City's decision to seek independent third parties to review current treatment processes, maintenance procedures and actions taken to date, and provide ideas for Improvement. We are pleased to present this final report to the City of Flint following our experts' 160-hour assessment of the water treatment plant, distribution system, customer service and communications programs, and capital plans and annual budget. This report provides recommendations and a roadmap for Improvement, though our engagement was limited in scope. Our assessment included reviewing actions taken by the City to date, validating the City's plans going forward, and making recommendations for ideas not being considered. Although a review of water quality records for the time period under our study indicates compliance with State and Federal water quality regulations, Veolia, as an operator and manager of comparable utilities, recommends a variety of actions to address improvements in water quality and related aesthetics Including: operational changes and Improvements; changes In water treatment processes, procedures and chemical dosing; adjustments In how current technologies are being used; increased maintenance and capital program activities; increased training; and, an enhanced customer communications program. We are also providing a recommended schedule and estimated costs for Implementing changes. It Is our desire to help Flint residents and public officials better understand the current situation so that informed decisions can be made to ensure safe drinking water for the city's customers.

1

Water Quality Report
March 12, 2015
DR...,
J'

Review of Actions Taken to Date
To address water quality Issues, the city has made operational changes, sought help from the State, hired engineering firm Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN) to provide additional advice, and hired Veolla for an assessment from a utility operator's perspective. The City has also reached out to different specially vendors (chemical suppliers, filter companies and tank aeration companies) for information about products to help with the TTHM issues. These are logical steps to take. Flint is not alone in dealing with TTHM problems, as many utilities across the country are facing this challenge. The City appears to be following standard steps that many of those communities are taking to successfully correct the problem. Although the primary focus of this review was based on solving the TTHM problem, the public has also expressed its frustration over discolored and hard water. Those aesthettc issues have understandably increased the level of concern about the safety of the water. The review of the water quality records during the lima of Veolla's study shows the water to be In compliance with State and Federal regulations, and, based on those standards, the water Is considered to meet drinking water requirements. The City has been proactive in Its efforts to reach out to the medical community, to set up a phone number and email address to receive complaints, to post State Water Quality reports, to provide the list of EPA required water tests, and offer to test the water at customers' homes. From our review, these numerous efforts demonstrate how the city Is trying to be transparent and responsive beyond what many other communities might do in similar circumstances.

2

Water Quality Report
March 12, 2015

State Report
The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) has requested specific actions be taken related to the total trihalornethane (TTHM) issues. The February 2015 report from LAN (Operational Evaluation Report TTHM Formation Concern) indicated apparent reasons for the elevated levels of TTHM in the distribution system. These generally relate to high Total Organic Carbon {TOC) In the water source, improperly operating equipment both in the plant and the distribution system, less-than-optimal plant TOC removal and old cast-Iron pipe in the distribution system. Om assessment confirms that these reasons are likely given our on-site laboratory testing and analysis, as well as our first-hand observations . Due to time constraints, LAN's report to the State was submitted prior to Veolla's final analysis and recommendations, and contained a number of l<ey initial and contingent steps the City should consider, including: Initial Actions Hire a Third Party Water Quality Expert to Complete Independent Audit Obtain a THM Analyzer · carry Out Jar Testing Water Plant Optimization Softening · · · · · Water Plant Optimization Disinfection of Filter Beds (Pre-Chlorination) Water Plant Optimization Polymer Aid to Coagulation and Flocculation Increase Water Main Flushing Water Modeling Cedar Street Pump Recirculation Water Modeling West Side Pump Recirculation Broken Valve Locations Increase Flushing

Contingent Actions · Fix Ozone System Start Feeding Coagulant and Flocculation Polymer · Convert to Lime and Soda Ash Softening Change Disinfection to Chloramine or Chlorine Dioxide Temporarily Install Pre-Oxidant at Intake Replace Filter Media Implement Advanced Treatment Increase Main-Flushing · Continue Valve Replacement Emphasize Cast Iron Pipe Replacement

3

Water Quality Report
Marcil 12, 20'15

"

"'

..

Veolia's Recommendations
While many ofVeolla's recommendations match the initial assessment provided by LAN, our approach, as an operator and manager of comparable utilities, considers a more comprehensive solution. These Improvements Include operational changes, differences In water treatment regimes and chemical dosing, increased maintenance, and increased training. · · Addition of Permanganate- The addition of a permanganate chemical will help reduce ozone demand as well as chlorine demand. The reduction of ozone Is needed to help eliminate the possibility of violating the bromate limit. The addition of the chemical will require state approval, submission of design documents for approval, procurement of the equipment and installation. The State has Indicated they ·will work with the City on expediting review and approval of any requested changes. The required dosage of permanganate is estimated to range from 0.5 mg/L to ·1.2 mg/L with a corresponding price of $160,000 to $320,000 per year. (Please note - The water In the river Is dynamic which means it will change with weather, seasons and other factors. The estimates provided are based on bench testing at a given lime and as such require the operators to test water and to veril'y chemical dosages on a frequent basis.) Reduction of Ozone Feed -Treating water is a delicate balance · increasing ozone to fix the TTHM problem can raise bromate levels to a point of violallon. The introduction of permanganate is being recommended to reduce the demand for ozone so that feed rates will not exceed 5 mg/L. The current ozone dosing has been as high as 8 mg/L and, as such, If allowed to continue, will increase the risk of violating the bromate levels. Increase of Ferric Chloride- Four coagulants were tested by Veolia -ferric chloride, ferric sulfate, polyaluminum chloride (PACI) and aluminum chlorohydrate (ACH). Ferric chloride and ACH were found to be the best choice of product for effectiveness in removing TOC, a precursor to TTHM formation. Current ferric chloride dosages are too low and dosages of 100 mg/L or more are reco mme nde~. Again, please note, that the amount of chemical needed changes with the nature of the river and as such, water must be tested multiple times a day wilh corresponding changes In chemical dosages. This increase to 100 mg/L is twice what is currently being fed and much higher than what had previously been fed last year. The Increase in chemical costs could be up to $1 ,000,000 per year. This change In dosage (using ferric chloride} can be made immediately without state permit review. Reduction of Lime - Lime is currently being overfed. A higher dosage of lime does not necessarily mean better treatment. A review of different dosages with jar testing Indicates that the current dosage of 280 mg/L can be reduced to 230 mg/L, This represents a potential range of savings of up to $270,000 per year. This change can be made immediately. It should be noted that the current soflening equipment Is in poor condition, which does complicate the treatment process wilh a poor balance of flow between the two basins, weirs that are not level causing bypassing with the softener basins, and simply old mechanical equipment that periodically breaks down. This equipment is not going to be needed when a change to lake water occurs. Addition of soda ash to help further reduce hardness in cold weather might require dosages up to 40 mg/L with an annual chemical cost up to $320,000. There have also been some questions or complaints from th e public regarding hard water. The water entering the plant is currently 360 mg/L and the plant is reducing that level of hardness to about 210 mg/L. Optimization of the dosage can reduce the hardness

·

·

4

Water Quality Report
March 12, 2015

further to about 180 mg/L, This reduction however has been sporadic as equipment breakdowns and high flows have caused problems keeping the softening process on-line. As we have noted before, the dosage needs to be adjusted daily or more often based on process control monitoring. The raw water hardness In the summer is much less than in the winter. For illustration purposes, the difference could be 360 mg/L In raw water In winter compared with 220 mg/Lin the summer. Eliminate Pre-Chlorination on the Filters- The reduction of pre-chlorination on the filters during the summer months can help reduce TIHM formation. This action has to be considered carefully with procedures documented and reviewed for engineering principles. As such, It will take time for the design engineer to determine what could be done to assure the proper chlorine contact time and document that other safety protocols in water are met. This requires state approval. Any submission should be considered along with a possible change in !liter media. If Granulated Activated Carbon (GAC) is Installed then the prechlorination would be stopped or drastically reduced because of the chlorine Impact on the GAC filler media. Veolia's Initial investigation into changes in chlorine feed point Indicate that the recommended action can be accomplished while maintaining the required regulatory contact time for disinfection. Change Filters to Granulated Activated Carbon (GAO)- The object of the other changes being made is to reduce the TOC before chlorine Is added Into the process. The plant by design Is limited on the amount of TOC removal possible. A maximum removal of only 60% Is likely If the plant Is properly optimized, The change of filter media to GAC would provide the best reduction possible and provide better than 90% removal dramatically reducing the potential for HHM formation and thus ensuring compliance with that parameter for the water system. The change In filter media; however, is complicated requiring approval by the state, design of the changes, procurement of the media and a contractor to install it. That will take time and is likely in a range of $1.5 mllllon (more or less) In cost. The use of GAG also requires more testing and monitoring of the media and the TOO than with the current media. GAC wlll accumulate TOC and begin to become in effective after a period of time. Depending upon the level of TOC reaching the filters this could be as short as 3 months and as long as 9 months. The amount of TOC is dependent upon the river water quality and operation of the other plant processes. Once the ability of the filters to remove TOC Is diminished, the GAC media has to be replaced if river water continues as a source. The change to lake water will not require TOC removal and the media could continue to be used as filter media for that new water source. Corrosion Control - The primary focus of this stu~y was to assure compliance with the TTHM limits. That Is not the only problem facing the city and Its customers though. Many people are frustrated and-naturally concerned by the discoloration of the water with what primarily appears to be Iron from the old unlined cast iron pipes. The water system could add a polyphosphate to the water as a way to minimize the amount of discolored water. Polyphosphate addition will not make discolored water Issues go away. The system has been experiencing a tremendous number of water line breaks the last two winters. Just last week there were more than ·14 in one day. Any break, work on broken valves or hydrant flushing will change the flow of water and potentially cause temporary discoloration. Ellmlnate a Stor·age Tank~ The water system has more storage than it requires, due to excess capacity in the water lines in combination with the storage tanl<s. The City has already employed LAN to update the hydraulic model. The hydraulic model should be used to help determine if water levels can be lowered further and even to remove some storage tanks from service. That decision may need to be made

5

W8ter Quality Report
Marc/1 12, 2015

.........,..

'"

Ui W

seasonally. For example demand during water main breaks last week required extensive amounts of water. The excess storage Is more a problem with TTHM formation for the system In summer than winter. Prioritize Valve Re placement ~ The hydraulic model shows long water age In portions of the system that appear to be contributing to the TTHM problems. LAN has updated the model to Include the location of broken valves and that added information is being used to Identify other system problems. The City has a con tract for valve turning and repair worl< that should be focused on known broken valves, particularly in sections of the distribution system with old water age. This activity however must wait until warmer weather In fear of causing problems in the water system with lines freezing. Target and Increase Flushing - Flushing the fire hydrants can be useful in cleaning outlines to minimize discolored water complaints and also helping reduce the age of water. This DOES NOT mean just opening hydrants. The hydraulic model needs to be used to determine which hydrants should be opened and for how long to ensure the lines are properly cleaned. For example, this might require 15 minutes or even several hours of flushing depending on location. The flushing of hydrants also needs to include records of hydrant condition, color of water Initially and after periodic increments plus chlorine residual testing. All of that information will help provide Information to the engineers on the effectiveness of the procedure. Each crew doing the work should be trained to help explain the process to the public and also warn neighborhoods about flushing so that staining of laundry can be avoided. · Change to Lake Water - The changes being made now to the water plant will not be the same changes required to treat lake water once it becomes available. A thorough analysis and plan needs to be made In preparallon of that switch. This is going to need to include changes in how the plant Is operated, like eliminating lime softening and reducing the dosages of many chemicals. Consideration will also have to be given to algae treatment when lake water is being used. Operating Programs- All of the changes discussed above are based on testing and techniques proposed by engineers and skilled operators of both LAN and Veolla. The staff will need further training and Implementation of detailed protocols to successfully Implement the changes and to ensure long-term success at the plant. This means the City needs to Implement a series of programs to ensure success in these changes.
o

·

Process Control Management Plan (PCMP)- The amount of testing and resulting changes in chemical dosages, along with monitoring the impact on the water, will require a well-documented process that all operators follow. An example of this is jar testing, which is used by the operators to Identify the most effective chemicals and dosages to optimize treatment. The staff understands the basic treatment process but needs further practice and training to become proficient In the use of routine process control to adjust for water quality. This Is commonly referred to as a PCMP and Is used as a standard operating procedure so that the operators on the day shift can communicate with the night shift, that operators are following the same treatment plan for water, that the adjustments are unified between different shifts and different people, th at a desired water treatment quality is defined and variations from it signal alarms and that the staff knows what to do when the water quality setpolnts begin to drift away from its desired quality levels. Lab QA/QC- The operation of the water plant Is dependent upon accurate lab results. Standard operating procedure needs to be set and lab technicians trained in that process. EPA and the State

o

6

Water Quality Report
March '12, 2015

... ,,.,.,
set procedures and standards to be met and the staff should strive to meet those standards. The City has already purchased a TTHM analyzer but should also consider a TOC analyzer that can be an online conllnuous device to provide Immediate Information on Influent and effluent levels of TOC. Part of the lab records should be historical review of data to help operators better understand the changes they mal<e In the plant. o Maintenance Management- The key to water equipment Is having all the equipment effectively maintained and functioning property. The current capital program Is fixing many broken pieces of equipment and updating the plant to current standards. This however mllst be foHowed with a rigorous maintenance program that ensures the proper preventive maintenance, Is able to predict when maintenance Is needed to keep equipment functioning properly and responsive to changes in flows and source water quanty. Training -The changes being suggested are new to the staff and as such training needs to be provided In what the changes involve, why they are being made, the impact on the water quality, and how best to run the plant. A good demonstration of skill level is for the staff to become certified by the State as a licensed water plant operator. Many utilities now require all operators to hold at least the minimum certification level as a starting point and offer Incentives to Increase their certification level.

o

·

Communication Program- The city should lay out an immediate, written strategy for communicating with the public in the short-term, as well as a 6-to-12 month strategy that contemplates known, future events like the l<WA pipeline and switch to lake water. A wide range of activities are underway to work with the public but a comprehensive and coordinated effort, with a strategic focus, will help the utility and its customers. Dedicated Communications Personnel- The City has a single, dedicated public information officer, tasked with providing service to all of city government. The current focus on communications support for Public Works, and the anticipated needs over the next several years, indicate the city would benefit from the hiring of a staff person In Public Works who could establish a communications program designed to provide clear and concise information to a broad audience though a number of different channels. In the interim, the city could hire a communications intern, local communications finn, or somebody with experience who Is able to provide reduced or no-cost services for the immediate future. Communications Planning- Public Notification- The Clly should be congratulated on its efforts to keep the public Informed. It is posting its monthly reports on the web page to provide transparency, though these reports are highly technical- and may be too technical for the customer base at large. They are valuable to those customers who do want this level of detail. The city should create a single-page dashboard of information that outlines the water utility's performance for the previous month, post the dashboard on the website, print copies for distribution at customer service or other reception areas, and be provided during speal<lng engagements or other events. This dashboard should be el:lsy to understand, and include: o
o

The number of water quality tests conducted the previous month The number of violations reported

7

Water Qualify Repo1t
Marcil "12, 2015

o

Whether these results are In or out of compliance Information about other proactive measures such as main and hydrant replacements, or other programs to improve performance of the water utility Benchmarking informalion so the reader has a greater understanding of how Flint compares with other similar utilities In the region and across the country

o
o

·

Public Meetings-There should be additional, proactive coordination with neighborhood, community and civic groups to provide speakers on timely topics. Given the list of numerous responsibilities, the Public Works director cannot do it alone- the city should identify three or four other staff members, knowledgeable about the water utility who can also speak to various groups, provide information and answer questions. The development of an outreach strategy to target key neighborh_ ood, community and civic groups also will advance the communications effort and the dissemination of Information in both the short and long term. Standard tools -Work crews. in the field are often the faces of the utility- the city should create standardized tools for communicating with the public that can be easily and qt1lckly delivered to the community in the event of main breaks, flushing or pre-planned capital improvements. Tools should Include:
o

Door hangers for individual distribution Yard signs with simple messaging to be placed near work-sites A simple tri-fold brochure wilh useful information about the utility and appropriate contact Information Specific flyers about a range of topics lnfographics about how the water system works, from the intake to the customer's site

o o o
o

Change In Billing Format- The City currently has no real way to reach all customers on a regular basis and provide Information. The city should consider changing from a billing postcard to using an envelope and bill stuffer. Monthly or bi--monthly bill inserts are typically used to provide educational material for customers and are standard ways to provide information. Understandably, budget considerations must be taken into account. · Use Public Affairs Programmi"ng and Opportunities- The news media has been covering this topic quite extensively - there are other media-related opportunities that may reach a wider audience. Taking advantage of these opportunities will help the city relay information to its customers and the community. o
o

Participate In regular editorial-board meetings to provide bacl< ground Information and updates on l<ey milestones or events. Identify a local weel<ly television program and offer to provide guests to speak about i<ey milestones or upcoming events.

Water Quality Report
Marcll12, 2015

Conclusions and Next Steps
The focus of this report Is to help assure TTHM compliance and then improve general water quality. The City had good results In Its most recent TTHM tests, although that Is to be expected with the changes made to dale and the cooler weather which contributes to low TTHM formation. Warm weather will be a different situation both in the nature of the Flint River water quality and in the formation of TTHM. Wllh those changes coming, the City needs to act quickly to make improvements before additional testing tal(es place this spring and summer. The summary below provides the recommended actions, a priority for their implementation and projected costs either operational or capital. The costs are rough orders of magnitude and will vary with changes in water quality, operational decisions, and engineering choices being made and In some cases require State approval. Although a priority Is assigned many of these actions can take place simultaneously.

Priority

Action

Annual Operational Cost

One Time Capital Cost

1

2

Implement operating programs for process control, lab QA/QC, maintenance, and training. These programs are needed regardless of the TTHM issue and will help with transition to lake water. The City has decided upon a central maintenance software and the water system should be the fir~t to utilize this program since costs are alreadybuqgeted. These pJograms should be initiated immediately. Contract with your engineer and Initiate discussions with the State on the reduction of chlorine prior to the filters -and changing the filter media to GAC. This activity has the longest time frame for design and approval, but also Is extremely critical to assuring reduced TTHM production. The current filter cleaning and maintenance project needs to be adjusted to take Into consideration the change in filter media both to dispose of the anthracite Instead of cleaning and to Install the GAC. This entire project needs to be done by early July to assure a flow of water throughout the system. Several months are required for the engineering design, State approval, bidding of work and Installation of GAG and as such needs to begin now. Contract with your engineer and Initiate discussions with the State on the addition of 0.6 to 1.2 mg/L of either potassium permanganate (dry) or sodium permanganate (liquid). This will take time to get approved and to implement. The use of liquid tanks at the raw water pump .station may be the quicl<est and least expensive alternative for a temporary measure.

$ 25,000 $250,000 $ 350,000

$

0

$1,500,000

$ 160,000 .. $320,000

$50,000

9

Water Quality Repo1t
March ·12, 20"15

3

4

5

Contract with your engineer and initiate discussions with the State on the addition of a corrosion con trol chemical. This action can be submitted and discussed with the state at the same time as the other chemical and filter changes saving time and effort. A target dosage of 0.5 mg/L phosphate is sug~ested for improved corrosion control. Increase the ferric chloride dosage to 100 mg/L depending on river water TOG levels. (Lower TOC levels can be treated with less ferric chloride.} This change can be made now and is allowed by the State. Reduce the ozone feed rate to 5 mgl. This change can be done now and does not require State approval. Reduce the lime dosage to minimize hardness levels arter softening. This will eliminate magnesium removal during treatment, but wilt also reduce total hardness. A reduction in carbon dioxide dosing for recarbonation treatment also Is expected due to the reduction in lime feed. This change can be made now and does not require State ap_Qroval. Confirm with the engineer when the revised hydraulic model will be completed and if necessary for time to focus on areas of longest water age If that would speed up the effort. Identify Impact of reducing tank levels or eliminating a tank seasonally to improve water age. Include with this effort a list of hydrants to flush along with time required to assure drawing fresh water through the system. The engineer has been assigned this tasl< already and confirmation of the timing of a delivery Is needed. Ask the engineer to identify closed valves on a map that are impacting water age and that can be bid for replacement as soon as weather permits. Have the engineer identify areas of the system where the valve contractor should be focused on finding and fixing closed valves. Implement the recommendations in the communications program including a person. assigned to public works education, using envelopes instead of cards alqng with bill stuffers for education and provide training for staff. Envelopes and bill stutrers are expensive and might be done pe·riodically and not every month. The cost of TTHM notices, Annual Water Quality Reports ancl City notices should be figured into If any additional costs would exist. Many of these changes are undeJWay_now by the City.

$ 50,000

$50,000

$ 1,000,000

$

0

($50,000$100 000 ($270,000)

$
$

0 0

$

0

Already Contracted

$

0

Already Budgeted

Position Being Budgeted

Notes
· The costs provided are rough order of masnltude which final engineering wlll nrm up but will fluctuate with nnal decisions on engineering, operating technique and water quality. · The chango from river to lake water will dramatically cut the chemical costs as less Is needad oncathe change occurs.1hls means that potassium pcrmaneanato wlllllkely not be needed, ferric will drop as much as It went up, ozone levels will be lower and little lime will be needed.

10

Water Quality Report
March 12, 20·15

Results Expected
The real question is what changes can be expected from these results in lowering the TTHM, improving the aesthetics and preparing for the change to lake water.

TTHM - The City has already made great strides In reducing the TTHM levels with the changes already made. The additional suggestions by Veolla will further reduce TTHM rn the water and help get the city released from the notices being provided to customers.
· Hal'dness - The hardness entering the plant this winter Is 360 mg/L with the current system reducing It to 210 mg/L and optimization will reduce to about 180 mg/L. During the summer the levels will be lower probably in the 140 mg/L to 150 mg/L range. The target set by the current best operating practices is 120 mg/L to 150 mg/L. Discolored Water- The discolored water is caused by the old unlined cast Iron pipe. The water from the plant can have an impact on discolored water, but a greater concern is the breaks and constwclion work that disrupt the flow of water causing discoloration. A polyphosphate Is suggested to help bind the old cast iron pipe reducing Instances of discolored water. This along with Improve flow of water and programmed hydrant flushing will help, BUT WILL NOT eliminate discolored water occurrences. Change to Lake Watel'- The recommendations Include the suggestion of programs to help the staff better manage the treatment process, additional testing to adjust the plant and additional lab monitoring, a maintenance program focused on keeping equipment properly functioning and more training for staff to Improve their skill level. Those actions will prepare the staff for the change of water sources when It comes next year in addition to developing a thorough plan for the switch.

11

0

-

<(

_J

G

>

w

Week 1 o Provide a review of current actions a Engage staff, visit facilities and analyze data o Make interim report

-~~....,

\f\leek 2

o

Carry out rnore detailed study of initi al findings

o

o

!Vlake recornrYlendations for Improving \Nai:er quality Provide a plan, co:st and schedu le for chanoe

Items of Note
o
<!I

Not in scope- studying why the change from DWSD or the history of the utility What we found- A very frustrated community and a staff trying to solve the problem,

having some success but frustrated with the pace of change
Q
February 18, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

2

o City,

state, news media, universities and

other groups
o

Safe = compliance with state and federal standards and. required testing
o

Latest tests show water is in compliance with drinking water standards Monthly report available on web page

o

o

More than 20,000 tests required annually

for city
o Strict

testing requirements in place (what and how to test)
3

0

February 18,2015 Flint Public Works Committee

o

TTHM is formed as a result of the reaction between chlorine and organic material in the water · o City is required .to test quarterly at 8 sites
o

Last summe0 several sites had more TTHM than allowed

o

City has reduced levels of TTHM and now all sites are in compliance
o

Customer notification letters are required until tests are in compliance an average of four quarters

o It
o

wifl take at least 2 more quarters to lower average
Even a change to DWSD water doesn't solve problem

o

Flint is not alone- hundreds of communities are facing TTHM issues

G

February 18, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

4

Old cast iron pipes o Always has been some discolored water problems mostly after water brea~s o Efforts to reducing TTHM didn't help discoloration
o
o

Location of water quality complaints The last 12 months- fewer than you th in k

._ ;:. _-~~?iJ,~ll·~·)j:)/1~~::} ·;:~~1·~ .
,_ .

A ·-~-:.:..:fl~ll'A~l;.

~--

_.... :...... :.-....:. ·.:_--.f:'-"·"'-'·~ :... ::...: .. -··l ~ ~ ,. ,.~ ,.' ··~ @. .

. .(§;,~. ···-- -

.~,.,

Doesn't mean the water is unsafe but it is not appealing and raises questions

·. .tf l i -:,,\ 't,:lfil,j7~ :~ ' ..-,~,~·
,,
.,.,_ '<'<,\/ · '?
·,;

~_,_,__ .,... ·J;>, 'Ill
'P/

!!: >

f ··

- ·

~.,.....

.

:_.·. '·,

: . .\ '

.' '

j --~''" ·-D' fl< .

·

< ?;'\ · · ¥ ,. = <? < -~, - ~

\ ,.,_ _ \ " ·, ' ;
l
-$

1;

·[

"'. ., ~\ :: :J. · . 1'-'\ ··,:··-: '·
~\

J?;_ , .

o

City will test the water at your home - call 787-6537 or emai l fl i ntwate r@cityoffl int. com o Tracking customer compraints is important

' .i ~t~~· ~ ~;~ l,·.-vu:r·':-~·"' { \ ,.,..,,~ P )/· .:·.:\/ ~ ·· ; . ··.~··'&:r-"7~
@
@ " '"'·'' "
:& ,. · ·

. 1

.'\·':·.'>"if.;i~ :·.· · ,i·:·'f~ ···:-,,, ·. ~· !,

:1 "<

· ). . ~ _.:.)..,.:.:. __..I"'' \:? ;;.':~';:: ·
mJ ~. \'H. ·

~.'. . 9® . ~~,..-,~ ~:.'c~:.] !Hrtrti<tol, :,;,Fw.rl£ ··(<) · H<~"1SI r'-...-~~~-r~"lt · ···.:·<q Y, . "''~";. .. 'i " ~-· : 'Y ·.. ~ ,:, ~ . r; . ·,
<'.,,

\ )./ l

~·:'::.-...:··~.

·~:rt<t1Tloo7r.f1.'rl

......
·

·

·fi

~~- ft:-,Jt:
--

~-=~< ~;-" : _Jg-.: ,.,.@o:=="-...,.,.et ~.... ...-~,,... L>;wFJ u.:.;u~ ·:·H: ~;->
).;'·'
Fhnt 't. .. '·' .· ) . . \;;_ .. '"' ·. ..;.~ .

·

:·· .....,.. .

.. .
@ .

'i

\ _ ~ ~> · i~zf!t~/..)j~i'.: ...i JttrtN{.\.
,, ;
..

r,J
¢

_r~l-t£W" . .;,;,f?:,,,.i 7.' =.;_.~~{.OJ , 11J£~:,~
lf;>!G\I!fl.b

S·"l!~,~'~.i',\~fP··l: ';;:·:i>:,\ ,; · ·: . . '-'

~~ -~~

~(!7 c··

·~ ~ ! ~~ G ~

. ~.~~~-~ ~~.

·'';

~

1

."i "

1~ ~
..

~

.

..

t")

l>;.;..

E

~

G

February 18, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

s

o

Adjust the chemicals being fedstop some, increase some and change some

o

o

Provide better monitoring of water quality to help make adjustments Continue repair or replacement of broken parts
Reduce the over capacity of the distribution system Do a better job explaining what is happening Do a better job of asking for help

o

o

o

0

February 18, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

G

0

< _J

G

>

w

o

Water plant improvements
o
o

o
o

o
o

Optimize chemical dosages Consider different chemicals Change dosing points install granulated activated carbon Complete plant upgrades Implement best mgt practices

o

Distribution system improvements
o
o

o

o
o

Fix broken valves Ask for customer feedback Reduce tank storage Target line flushing Run a hydraulic model

o

Better communication with customers
o
o

o o

Engage advisory committees More accessible utility Make it easy to access information Better customer communicaUon
8

G

February 18, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

ferric chloride

00

//

lime cationic · anionic polymer-~

~"'

0

·
0

Test each unit to find the best combination of chemical & dosage Compare combined process to industry benchmarks for water quality Use models to predict results for TIHM, Chlorine Levels and Corrosion
February 16, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

carbon dioxide

m/"71

chlorine

W
fluoride ~'- / chlorine

-m

G

9

Cost effective plan in budget
a

Digging up a water valve for repair

Need good weather to start

Complete water plant renovation
o

Target SCADA and instrumentation in plant

o

o o

Speed up valve turning contract & provide money for replacements Speed up hydraulic model update to reduce tank volume Evaluate installing of granulated activated carbon on filters Weather can ;mpact timing

0

February 1 B, 2015 Flint Public Works Commi\tee

10

Activities to Help Operators Maintain Good Water Quality Process Control Management Plan o Lab QA/QC Program o Computerized Maintenance Management System
o

o Asset
o

Management System

Training and Certification Program o Vulnerability Plan
G
February 1S, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

11

o Speed

up flow of water from plant to homes - 2 weeks plant to house
o

Flushing out discolored water

o

Find closed valves & open them Replace broken valves Update hydraulic model Reduce system storage Test customer water Spot flush hydrants to clean areas of stagnant water in the system

o
o

o Track customer complaints
o

o

Q

February 18, 2015 Flin t Public Works Committee

12

0

<(

....)

>

0 w

Develop a proactive customer communication plan
o

Create advisory committees to help direct efforts and improve flow of information Establish a single point of contact to manage all water quality complaints Provide additional customer service training to staff Exp-and neighborhood and community outreach Change monthly billing statements from card to envelope with information

o

o
o o

0

February 18, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

14

NOTICE: ANNUAL FLUSHING PROGRAM
We are conducting our annual flushing program to enhance your water quality and dean the distribution system.

DC Water crews will be flushing hydrants in your area 10:00 to a.m. on the following es:

p.m. 6'(0

"

r/Z.f

d7a

through __.· CJ'-+----'3_ --- 0 _ __

7

~MPORTANT

iNFORMATION

· Your water supply will not be shut off during hydrant flushing. · You may notice slight water discoloration or low water pressure. · During this time, customers can continue normal water usage, including drinking, bathing and laundry (unless water is discolored).

If you expedence discolored water during this period:
Run your cold water taps for 15 minutes. If it does not dear up, please contact our Dri_ nkingWater Division. · Do not run your hot water. If you experience discolored water from your hot water tap for several hours, then it is recommended to drain and flush your water heater tank.
o

0

February 18, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

15

Addressing Flint's Water Concerns: Water System Questions
& Answers and Related Documents.
~:!.-:.-J~r~

Recent Posts
>
C'.tro:811'1t'··J:Jtir S!l t.f;,J ~~
Oc.b,~d f~~S'"..me CLI!".C..T4-":0
~ibn.rli).'H ·

.:m.s

>

P. m:H'ril :n:.~tnit'Cl;"'iJ 1Jtb J n
lV;.:~ £1.F-~ "f\'~·~ ~:eM A'T'R:t:ato ,L,S$i'SS C:1tftW;tiC

tS:vtS F'c:~n·J.""J 1~.2015
)
Sno,·tf2:;tr<t:r2lVpod;:t:;:'c<\ol~c~ Ci:Jriti,J:.ts'e:::rW,IAfl!Sf~b'\:U:' 4.::0~$

> tv ;:.f ;".;~.n(: E't'\c.c-'Ur·~'s t!~,·-<:t:n:
~ l!i'p:-;~=~bb-)f.S ti'/C:'~!!ir.:

Sr!Cf."l'C;tS'Ck.'/i. S.s::;,.l't\fF:I'e

MidW\lS -.s r.uc Sl\o?.'l ir ~P'-:ttd ft.t.rvll')'.:.l:015

Added Below on 128.2015: DWTP Monthly Operation Report and

>

'''J' o~ F~tsnt:r.Y R:ttr.!71~; f((ofn
N·,~C..1u:~Mc.;U.' P!o' ikn~s.

Water Quality Report Summary.
~

Ccycf r:int-.·.·11 ~ ~ollae-tre.J.usln~~n\)t:On ~ch~rr.o.,lt.'l~t:On ttp«U .lndt~tu·

we,!,. ···...1 $00.1 Cc.nttl'tu~ .( .to ~..s·.ten~.!l ;..tC:i.S r'iJ:.ao~JrJ ~ 201 S

<;,L'il':tf S\JrT"JT.;rl~to ~e,~ tM pt..l:ifi.C );>pt'·ls.td oCtJ'Ie :Utu::; Cr( d't;n_un: Wit(<f)n flint :as U'ft!J ~
~J~':t~.

>

~t:ut."'cSen~o!~:-.,St~!Jio"..:"~
'C:r JW·,t~ C't"'~t';t:On ~nd A~~-~-...;.:.r,;

s..-.'.ce. f;x ~.!Ct'IC.:i'. f<2tf\.·;r; ~
l015.01:~ to 1-!~n:,·~rwN~tt'"".:"/

e- ~~ ~.:~_ i0

n-.- -·-"-'--' <--

f,Jt'll5
1-··· v ~ep checking back for updated

> or-..·t O'rt-.1N Ho~~·,tO:: CtYft

-

-

A

fe

February 1B, 2015 Flint Public W orks Committee

16

<(

:J 0

G

>

w

o

VVeek 1 · -o Provide a review of current actions
Engage staff, visit facilities and analyze data

o

o

f\/lake interirn report

Week2 o Carry out more detailed study of initial findings o Make recommendations for Improving water quality o Provide a plan, cost and schedule for chanae

G

February 18, 2015 Flint Public Wor ks Commilfee

18

REMEMBER
We just started. Might not have an answer yet to your question
o

When will water improve -The water has improved with cu rrent actions. More changes will occur over weeks and months because of safety reviews o Date of next update and final report- An update will be provided next week and a report the following week. o Time frame ~or implementing recommendations -The City is already started. Others a few days and some weeks or months due to State approval being required or weather. o Cost of changes - Don't know yet but we are aware of the financial concerns

Q

February '!8, 1!015 Flint Public Works Committee

19

o

How are TTHM formed - It's the reaction of chlorine to organics (leafs, dirt) in the water. o How to reduce TTHM - Reduce organics before introducing chlorine and shorten time chlorine has to react with the organ res o What causes discoloration - Older lines, the iron parts of the system will leach iron into the water causing the discoloration. Other tfmes its just air built up. o Why no discoloration with DWSD -There was. Flint had a bad time with breaks of old line and is doing lots of construction. This stirred up the water and caused discoloration.
·,

G

20

o

Can you test my water- The city will test your water for free. But only 2 of 20 people have taken the city up on the offer since it began offering the service. o Medical problems - Some people may be sensitive to any water. Talk to your doctor. The City is communicating with the medical community. o Confidence that future problems will be avoided Recommendations will include putting programs in place to better respond to water changes and assure quality
1

0

February 16, 2015 Flint Public Works Committee

21

.. ······-····-··- · - - · · · - - - - - - - -

G

>

:::i 0 w

<

From: GOV Newsroom [mailto:govnewsroom@govsubscrlptions.michigan.gov] 2015 4:55 PM Sent: Thursday, October To: Snyder, Rick (G Subject: NEWS RELEASE: Gov. Rick Snyder signs orizing funding for Flint to move back to Detroit water system

REINVENTIN . .
Getting It Right.

qovernor Rick Snyd~e
Gettin It Done.

ICHIGAN

Contacts: Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray ·

517-335-6397

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Thursday, Oct. 15, 2015

Gov. Rick Snyder signs bill authorizing funding for Flint to move back to Detroit water system
Temporary reconnection provides best protection for public health

1

LANSING, Mich.- Gov. Rick Snyder has signed bipartisan legislation that will direct funding to the City of Flint's emergency water services to reconnect the city's water supply to the Great Lakes Water Authority until the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline is completed. "This funding is a coordinated response to a serious problem and I'm pleased so many parties came together to help deliver safe drinking water to the city of Flint," Snyder said. "Reconnecting to the Great Lakes Water Authority is only the first step, as ·the state will continue testing and inspections to ensure Flint families and children have clean water in their homes and schools." House Bill 4102, sponsored by state Rep. AI Pscholka, authorizes $6 million to move the city back to Detroit's water system until the new pipeline is finished. · In addition to the $6 million: · · · · · · $300,000 goes to the Department of Environmental Quality's drinking water and environmental health services; $1 million will provide for DEQ to test drinking water samples; $1 million allows the Department of Health and Human Services to purchase and distribute water filters to Flint residents; . $850,000 will aid in follow-up services for c.hildren, including testing, investigations, and case management for those with elevated blood lead levels; $200,000 will·fund state plumbing inspections for schools and health facilities. The City of Flint city government will provide $2 million toward reconnecting the water supply and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation has committed $4 million.

The bill was approved unanimously in both the House and Senate and is now Public Act 143 of 2015. For more information on this and other legislation, please visit www.legislature.mi.gov.

####
2

STAY CONNECTED:

~ :-~- ~
This email was sent to 335-7858 on behalf of: The Executive Office of the Governor· 11 '1 South Capitol Avenue· Lansing, Ml 48909 · 517-

3

From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) Sent: Sunday, October 18, 2015 4:30PM To: Snyde r, Rick (GOV) Cc: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfefs@mich igan.gov>; Agen, Jarred (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov> Subject: FW: Detroit News Flint II

Governor, Attached is our response to the Detroit News for a story that they are preparing for tomorrow. Part of that story looks at whether the DEQ staff followed appropriate federal protocols in light of Flint's population size. My responses, enclosed here, are an effort to acknowledge something that has come out in the past week through internal review. Simply said, our staff believed they were constrained by two consecutive six"month tests. We followed and defended that protocol. I believe now we made a mistal<e. For communities with a population above 50,000, optimized corrosion control should have been required from the beginning. Because of what I have learned, I will be announcing a change in leadership in our drinking water program. I've spoken with Dennis about this, and will be making that announcement as part of the Detroit News article that likely will be out tomorrow. We've spoken with Jarred and Sara about this today as well. Call me if you have any questions. Thank you.

Dan Wyant, Director Department of Environmental Quality 517-284-6700 (New Number) From: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ)

Sent: Sunday, October 18, 20l5 3:54PM
To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) Subject: Detroit News Flint II

All,
1

Brad, After reviewing the emails made available through FOIA, there are several things that seem to need addressing. 1. It appears DEQ staffers have essentially down played or ignored warning signs from EPA's water expert, Miguel Deltoral. We have been aware of Mr. Deltoral's unofficial memo th at went public in April. But his email dated two months earlier on Feb. 27, to Jennifer Crooks and M ike Prysby, he seems to lay out exactly what's come to pass...

"(Particulate lead readings) Folks tend to discount these values as anomalies, but particulate lead release is a normal part of the corrosion process and it is universal (common) in all systems. It's just that it's not captured as often by the infrequent LCR sampling. If systems are pre-flushing the tap the night before collecting LCR compliance samples (MDEQ) still provides these instructions to public water systems) this clea rs particulate lead out of the plumbing and biases the results low by eliminating the highest lead values. If systems are pre-flushing and still finding particulate lead, t he amount of particulate lead in t he system ca n be higher than what is being detected using these "pre-flushed" first-draw samples. "My point on that was that people are exposed t o the particulate lead on a daily basis, but the particulate lead is being flushed away before collecting compliance samples which provides false assu rance to residents about the true lead levels in the water." Miguel goes on to address the optimal corrosion control situation in that same Feb 27 email. "If I remember correctly, Detroit is feeding (phosphate) for the lead/copper rule, but since Flint is no longer part of that interconnection, I was wondering what their OCCTwas. They are requ ired to have OCCT in place which is why I was asking what t hey were using." So what I'm seeing here is Miguel having raised these issues as far back as February. When unofficial April memo shows up, it's clear these issues still haven't been addressed. Another email from the day before came from Jennifer Crooks at EPA which also highlights early concern about a lack of proper corrosion controls as well as the testing methods. "The City can't j ust flush in advance of t aking the compliance samples, they have t o flush the lines on a regular basis." Can you respond to the fact that it appears the state ignored or disregarded several warnings from EPA officials about testing deficiencies and insufficient corrosion controls? Em ails offer snapshots of a much broader conversation . The program staff did not ignore the information. They believed they were hand ling the situation in full accordance with federal protocols, and contacted EPA Region 5 officials promptly to seek guidance. They were more than halfway done with compliance sampling under the federa l protocol and the goth percentile samples to that point showed 6 pbb- barely in excess of the 5 pbb threshold.

2.

Corrosion control, or the lack thereof, seems to be another major problem here. At the first of the recent press conferences, Dan Wyant said that lime was being used as a corrosion contro l method. But that is clea rly contradicted by DEQ staff at several points. One of those is Pat Cook's email from April 24. "Flint is currently not practicing corrosion control treatment at the (water treatment plant)." This puts Dan's comments about the lime into question. There's been some con fusion on this point, and I t hink it was addressed in our previous response. This was a misunderstanding w ith technical staff. Lime was added to softe n the water. While it adjusts pH and can have some Impact on corrosivity, it was insufficient corrosion control.

3.

I gather from several exchanges in here that EPA and DEQ disagree over that the state's responsibility was in ensuring there was optimal corrosion contro l. One of the emails from July includes notes from a meeting of all the parties shows that EPA was asking why that hadn't been used from the outset, and the state's response was something along these lines:

""MDEQ explained that they did not treat th e switch to Flint River water as a " new system," but as a new source. It is their understanding that two rounds of 6-month t esting is still needed to characte rize the water qua lity. They don't know wh at optimized is until those two rou nds of six month monitoring are completed." Under the lead copper rule, was the state required to haite phosphate treatment in place? It appears here that t he state chose to interpret the CLR as not requiring corrosion control. That seems like a highly dubious conclusion. And after concerns were raised repeatedly beginning (at least as early as February), why was nothing done? What has become clear in recent weeks is that staff believed they were handling t he situation In accordance w ith the proper protocol for a water provider using a new source, but t he fede ral Lead and Copper rule has a particular provision for communities over 50,000 people; that the system operator must continue treating with full corrosion co ntrol even as they test t he water. What the staff did would have been the proper protocol for a community under 50,000 people. None of the DEQ staff in t his division had eve r worked on a water source switch for a community over 50,000 people- it's uncommon for our big communities to switch sources. It's increasingly clear t here was confusion here, but it also is increasingly clear that DEQ staff believed t hey were using th e proper federa l protocol and th ey were not. The Governor will soon announce an independent, third party, after-action rev iew to detail what happened and why, and offer steps to make sure Michigan's drinking water program is on a better course in the future. 4. Another area of co ncern, one I mentioned on t he phone, is the pace of response. And I understand that the lead copper rul e lays out response times. But you have concerns being

raised about lead by an EPA expert as far back as February. The state's response, in several instances, is that federal guidelines give us two six-month periods to collect samples, and th en more time to submit an action plan, and then a year or more to enact that plan. While those delays in making a change may be permitted under the law, given that we're tt~ll<ing about a possible public health crisis, why wasn't th ere more expediency? The responses in these emails appear to be without any sense of urgency at a time when Flint resiqents may have been drinking dangerous water. The results of two rounds of water testing showed the city needed to move to optimizing its corrosion contro l. That order was issued Aug. 17. 5. At many points along the way, serious concerns are made about the state's testing methods. The Virginia Tech results were not the first time someone had indicated state testing- as approved by federal guidelines- might not be giving accurate readings. Miguel's April memo reads: "I wanted to follow up on this because Flint has essentially not been using any corrosion control treatment since April 30, 2014 and they have (lead service lines) . Given the very high lead levels found at one home and the pre-flushing happening in Flint, I' m worried that the whole town may have much higher lead levels than the compliance results indicated, since they are using pre-flushing ahead of th eir compliance sampling."

There is substantial controversy over the lead and copper rule- the EPA has been working for years on ways to update it, and Michigan will be an active part of that conversation going forward. The situation in Flint is a snapshot of an issue affecting cities around the state and the nation. More than a dozen states use the sampling protocol Michigan uses- that's not a defense of th e protocol, but rather an Indication that even experts on the issue disagree about the most effective testing methods. What everyone can agree on is that lead is a serious issue. And I think everyone can agree that when the state came to recognize that there could be a health threat in the city, we took appropriate action. We are now engaged In an unprecedented effort to protect kids and families In Flint, develop more knowledge about what has happened and how people were affected, and take steps to make sure it doesn't happen again -In Michigan, or anywhere else. All the people who brought this issue forward deserve credit for bringing it to us. Our actions reflected inexperience, and our public response to criticism was the wrong tone early in this conversation. But the best we can do with the situation going forward is represented in our present course - the Governor's plan repre sents all the suggestions outlined in th e draft EPA rnemo, the Virginia Tech report, and the guidance we've gotten from EPA. We will learn from this. We will make necessary changes to see to it that ou r program becomes a national leader in protection.

Need your review of th is document. It's our response to Detroit News story t hey're prepping for tomorrow. Per Sara, Dan Thanks,

wW call Jarrod shortly to discuss what we're proposing to do here.

b

2

From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV} Sent: Wednesday, October 2 2015 9:21AM To: Snyder, Rick Cc: Agen, Jarred (GOV} <AgenJ@michigan , Dennis (GOV} <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV} <clemente@michigan.gov>; Scott, Allison (GOV} <scotta12@michigan.gov> Subject: Re: Flint water question from Mildred

From DHHS on this pmticular 0/issue: Dr. Eden Wells spoke this am with Dr. Mona Hannah Attisha, Dr. Lawrence Reynolds and the lead Public Health nurse at the Genesee County Health Department and there is absolutely no lnfmmation to suppott the claims made by the Reverend on Mildred Gaddis' show. Dr. Hannah Attisha also checked the Intensive Care Unit and there were no patients similar to what the Rev~rend described. Additional Background: MDHHS has daily communication with the Genesee Co. Health Department via daily calls at 3 p.m. and Dr. Eden Wells also conununicates frequently with Dr. Mona Hanna Attisha ofHmley and Dr. Lawrence Reynolds who heads up Pediatrics ofHmley. We will follow up with Mildred. And we should definitely consider if/who follows up with Rev Bullock as well - Harvey? Dennis? Sent from my iPhone

On Oct 21,2015, at 8:00AM, Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wmfels@michigan.gov> wrote: Would quickly add that DHHS has almost daily conference calls with the local public health depa1tment in Flint. Nothing like thls has come up to date. But again they are working to double and triple check

Sent fi:om my iPhone On Oct 21, 2015, at 7:41AM, Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wmfels@michigan.gov> wrote: Absolutely, had talked with Allison about that. DI-ll-IS is double checking just in case and will help track down ASAP.
1

Sent from my iPhone

She claimed that two Flint children were in critical condition over lead. Her source was Rev. Bullock I said I wasn't aware of that and that all of the identified children were being tracked by public health officials. Please check on the status of children with higher level of lead. Thanks Rick Sent from my iPad

2

From: GOV Newsroom [mailto:govnewsroom@govsubscriptions.michigan.gov] Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 2:07 PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Subject: NEWS RELEASE: Gov. RickS Water Task Force to review state, federal and municipal actions, offer recommendations

REINVE:NTIN

Governor Rick Snyd~e ~' IJA/i
Getting ~t Right. Getttn It Done.

ty~CHIGAN

Contacts: Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 517-335-6397

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Wednesday, Oct. 21, 2015

Gov. Rick Snyder announces Flint Water Task Force to review state, federal and municipal actions, offer recommendations
Experts in public health, water management, environmental protection to focus on steps to · protect residents
LANSING, Mich.- Gov. Rick Snyder today announced the creation of an independent advisory task force charged with reviewing actions regarding water use and testing in Flint and offer recommendations for futLire guidelines to protect the health and safety of all state residents . Task force members include experts in public health and medicine, water management, and environmental protection from both sides of the a isle, and will be co-chaired by Ken Sikke!Jla of Public Sector Consultants and Chris Kolb, of the Michigan Environmental Council. Also serving will be Dr. Matthew Davis of the University of Michigan Health System, Eric Rothstein, of the Galardi Rothstein Group and Dr. Lawrence Reynolds of Matt Children's Health Center in Flint.

1

"Transitioning back to the Detroit Water and Sewerage Depariment-Great Lakes Water Authority is a good first step to protecting public health in Flint, but it's not the last step," Snyder said. "Bringing in outside experts to evaluate our actions and help monitor and advise on potential changes to law, procedures and practices will be key to continuing work on the compreh ensive action plan and ensuring safe drinking water for all the residents in Flint and all of Michigan." Snyder said the administration will fully cooperate with task force members, saying he wants an unbiased report focusing on steps taken in the past and recommendations that could improve practices to ensure all residents have access to safe, clean water. Ken Sikkema is a senior policy fellow at Public Sector Consultants, where he specializes in public finance, environment, and energy policy. Prior to joining the firm, Sikkema served in both the Michigan House and Senate, culminating with four years as Senate majority leader. He has also served as both an adjunct and visiting professor at Grand Valley State University. Chris Kolb is president of the Michigan Environmental Council, a statewide coalition of 70 environmental, public health and faith-based nonprofit groups. Before joining the MEC, Kolb represented Ann Arbor in the state House for six years and served six years on the Ann Arbor City Council. He has been president of the MEC for six years. Matthew Davis, M.D., M.A.P.P., is professor of pediatrics and internal medicine at the University of Michigan Health System and professor of public policy at the Gerald R. Ford School at the University of Michigan, having joined the faculty in 2000. Davis also is a professor of health management and policy at the School of Public Health. He previously served as the chief medical executive of the Michigan Department of Community Health/Department of Health and Human Services. Eric Rothstein is a national water issues consu ltant and principal at the Galardi Rothstein Group. He served as an independent advisor on the creation of the Great Lakes Water Authority. Rothstein also has served as Jefferson County, Alabama's rate consultant and municipal adviser for litigation related to the county's bankruptcy and issuance of $1.7 billion in sewer warrants and led strategic financial planning for the City of Atlanta's Department of Watershed Management. He has more than 30 years of experience in water, wastewater and stormwater utility finance and ratemaking assessments. Lawrence Reynolds, M.D., is a pediatrician in Flint who serves as president of the Mott Children's Health Center. He received his medical degree from Howard University College of Medicine and has been in practice for 36 years. He has served as president of the Genesee County Medical Society and the Michigan Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. He has been honored for his humanitarian and advocacy efforts on beha lf of children from the Community Foundation of Greater Flint. Snyder has said reconnecting with the authority is a critical step to resolving water quality issues and addressing related health concerns. It will not immediately resolve the city's problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It wi ll take time for pipes in .Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. To best protect public health, state and local authorities will continue to carry out steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to eliminate lead exposure. The Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services are continuing to provide
2

free water filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposu re monitoring for lead in drinking water.

####

n

STAY CONNECTED:

~, ~

Tills email was sent to 335-7858

on behalf of: The Executive Office of the Governor · 111 South Capitol Avenue· Lansing, Ml48909 · 517·

3

From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV} Sent: Tuesday, Novem To: Snyder, Rick (GOV} Cc: Agen, Jarred (GOV} <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Murray, (GOV} <MurrayDl@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@m ichigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV} <muchmored@michigan.gov> Subject: FW: Flint water school testing results Importance: High GovernorPer our conversation at our comms meeting today, here is t he news release and background/highlights of DEQ's schools water testing data that was released yesterday. DEQ also has video that they're using for some footage of the t esting with TV stations. Link here if you want to check out: https:Uyoutu.be/Amy4cDW7RtA Sill no exact word on timing of blood lead level data from DHHS- hopefu lly by late this week. Please let us know if you have any Qs or would like anything else at all.

Freeman Elementary water testing shows lead exposure limited to fixtures
Experts release water testing results on schools and homes in Flint
As part of Gov. Rick Snyder's action plan for Flint drinking water, the DEQ today released water testing data from nearly 400 homes and businesses in Flint as well as comprehensive sampling results from Freeman Elementary School. Both sets of data indicate the problems with lead are localized to individual buildings or even individual faucets, rather than system-wide issues. "The results from this data underline the need for water testing at all homes, businesses, schools and other buildings in Flint," said George Krisztian, the DEQ's Flint Action Plan Coordinator. "Problems with lead exposure appear to be localized to individual service lines or plumbing fixtures, and we want to see all families in Flint take advantage of free water testing from the state."
1

Freeman Elementary testing results At Freeman Elementary, 31 faucets were tested using a series of four samples each. Twenty-two outlets did not show elevated lead exposure, but nine faucets came back with initially high results. Those nine outlets involve brass components, indicating the problem involves the fixtures or plumbing immed iately surrounding the fixture. When the faucets and fountains were operated for several minutes, lead levels fell significantly, in some cases to non-detectable levels. Additional testing designed to look deep into the school's plumbing did not suggest larger, systemic issues. Freeman Elementary has several options for remedying the issues at these nine faucets and fountains. The school can elect not to use those particular fountains, or implement a formalized flushing regimen. The sampling results indicate that for all but one tap, a 3- to 4-minute flushing period each morning would drastically reduce lead exposure. For a permanent solution, the school should opt to replace the faucets and fountains of concern. "The safety and health of our students are our primary concern at Flint Community Schools, so we will start work as soon as possible to replace faucets , aerators and other related components where high lead levels were detected," FCS Superintendent Bilal Tawwab said. "Once those fixes have been made, the DEQ has offered to provide additional testing of the water at Freeman Elementary to ensure the water from every sample is safe for our students. Flint Community Schools appreciates the efforts by the DEQ, working with all stakeholders to make sure our water continues to be tested and that our students have access to safe, clean drinking water." For Freeman Elementary's complete sampling results and more information about how sampling was conducted, visit www.michigan.gov/flintwater. The DEQ and the DLARA also have conducted sampling at other Flint schools, and results will soon be available on the DEQ's website. Additionally, the state will test every other school in the Flint Community Schools district, as well as any school or daycare in the city. Interested schools and daycare centers should contact George Krisztian at krisztiang@michigan.gov. Homeowner and other customer-requested testing results Results from the 381 samples from homes, businesses, schools and other facilities that took advantage of free water testing through the state showed similar, localized results. More than 75 percent of the samples analyzed demonstrated lead results of 5 parts per billion or less, and more than 91 percent demonstrated lead results of 15 parts per billion or less. This data suggests that while some homes experience elevated lead level results due to lead service lines or in-home plumbing, many other homes experience little to no lead. This can make it difficult for homeowners and businesses to predict their lead exposure . "Since it's not easy to predict if an individual home's water is at risl< for lead, the best thing all residents can do is get their water tested," Krisztian said. "It's a free test that provides valuable information for families." Testing is available for free by contacting the Flint Water Plant at 810-787-6537 and pressing 1, or by emailing flintwater@cityofflint. com. For more information about water samples received through the state's free testing program, visit www.micl1igan.gov/flintwater. How school sampling was conducted To conduct this comprehensive sampling, the DEQ and Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs began on Oct. 23 with a thorough plumbing assessment of the school to gain a comprehensive
2

understanding of how water moves through the building and what types of plumbing materials are used. The assessment also identified 31 faucets or fountains in the school that provide water for drinking, cooking and/or food preparation. On Oct. 24, the DEQ and DLARA took four, 125-milliliter samples from each of the 31 identified faucets and fountains. The first two samples were taken immediately after turning on the faucet, followed by a 30-second flush and then the third sample, followed by a 2-minute flush and then the fourth sample. These samples provided information on the impact of any lead sources in or around each specific faucet and fountain as well as its connecting p lumbing. On Oct. 31, the DEQ and DLARA took an additional 30 samples, 10 each from three sites in the school. These 1-liter samples were taken consecutively, and provided information about the impact of any lead sources deep in the building's plumbing.

3

Talking Points on Freeman Announcement

Q: How do we describe the home tests?

A: The home tests are a surveillance-level screening tool. It is the same test used by the state to comply with the federal Lead and Copper Rule.
Q: SO, a safe reading doesn't mean my water is safe?

A: A low reading means there are no fixture-related issues. This screening may not catch impacts of a lead service line to the home. If a homeowner isn,t sure whether they have a lead service line the best way for homeowners to be absolutely sure is to have a certified plumber inspect their home.
I

Q: Does home plumbing inspection mean they dig up my yard?

A: Usually no. A good plumber can usually assess the service line from the point of entry to the home.
I

Q: Was the inspection of the schools done with a different kind of testing? If so, how so?

A: Yesl the testing at the schools is a very thorough protocol designed to first determine if there are fixture-specific issues then look deeper into the system to identify possible lead plumbing issues.
I

Q: What was learned by the testing at Freeman Elementary?

A: We identified 9 of 31 sites where the plumbing clearly was imparting
lead into water. Importantly, we did repeated draws of the water at these spots over several minutes! and saw lead levels drop dramatically. This means the lead is in the fixtures not in the water lines. It means the fixtures need to be addressed in some way- flushing for several minutes will help but replacement of these fixtures offers a more permanent solution. And it means the water at Freeman is safe at 22 of the 31 sites inspected, which is of some reassurance to school officials.
I I

Q: The City is now using water from Detroit. When will the water be free from lead again?
A: The water from Detroit is treated with phosphates, which coat the insides of lead home service lines and will reduce lead impacts. The City also will . be adding additional phosphates to develop this coating more quickly, but it could take months for corrosion control to be achieved throughout the system. It is important to note that, even in systems where optimal corrosion control exists, lead components in home plumbing can still cause lead exposure. Removing lead from home plumbing is the only permanent solution to address lead in home water supplies. And testing is the best way to get an accurate sense of one's exposure. In Flint, blood testing for children is free, and surveillance testing of water for any resident also is free.

DE iO.
Nov. 9,2015

~

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality

D\fews Release

For More Information: George Krisztian, 517-284-6719, l<risztiang@michigan.gov

Freeman Elementary water testing shows lead exposure limited to fixtures
Experts release water testing results on schools and homes in Flint
As part of Gov. Rick Snyder's action plan for Flint drinking water, the DEQ today released water testing data from nearly 400 homes and businesses in Flint as well as comprehensive sampling results from Freeman Elementary School. Both sets of data indicate the problems with lead are loca lized to individual buildings or even individual faucets, rather than system-wide issues. "The results from this data underline the need for water testing at all homes, businesses, schools and other buildings in Flint," said George Krisztian, the DEQ's Flint Action Plan Coordinator. "Problems with lead exposure appear to be localized to individual service lines or plumbing fixtures, and we want to see all families in Flint take advantage of free water testing from the state."
Freeman Elementary testing results At Freeman Elementary, 31 faucets were tested using a series of four samples each. Twentytwo outlets did not show elevated lead exposure, but nine faucets came back with initially high results .

Those nine outlets involve brass components, indicating the problem involves the fixtures or plumbing immediately surrounding the fixture. When the faucets and fountains were operated for several minutes, lead levels fell significantly, in some cases to non-detectable levels. Additional testing designed to lool< deep into the school's plumbing did not suggest larger, systemic issues. Freeman Elementary has several options for remedying the issues at these nine faucets and fountains. The school can elect not to use those particular fountains, or implement a formalized flushing regimen. The sampling results indicate that for all but one tap, a 3- to 4-minute flushing period each morning would drastically reduce lead exposure. For a permanent solution, the school should opt to replace the faucets and fountains of concern "The safety and health of our students are our primary concern at Flint Community Schools, so we will start work as soon as possible to replace faucets, aerators and other related components where high lead levels were detected," FCS Superintendent Bilal Tawwab said.

"Once those fixes have been made, the DEQ has offered to provide additional testing of the water at Freeman Elementary to ensure the water from every sample is safe for our students. Flint Community Schools appreciates the efforts by the DEQ, working with all stakeholders to make sure our water continues to be tested and that our students have access to safe, clean drinking water." For Freeman Elementary's complete sampling results and more information about how sampling was conducted, visit www.michigan.gov/flintwater. The DEQ and the DLARA also have conducted sampling at other Flint schools, and results will soon be available on the DEQ's webs ite. Additionally, the state will test every other school in the Flint Community Schools district, as well as any school or daycare in the city. Interested schools and daycare centers should contact George Krisztian at l<risztiang@michigan.gov. Homeowner and other customer-requested testing results Results from the 381 samples from homes, businesses, schools and other facilities that took advantage of free water testing through the state showed similar, localized results. More than 75 percent of the samples analyzed demonstrated lead results of 5 parts per billion or less, and more than 91 percent demonstrated lead results of 15 parts per billion or less. This data suggests that wh ile some homes experience elevated lead level results due to lead service lines or in-home plumbing, many other homes experience little to no lead. This can make it difficult for homeowners and businesses to pred ict their lead exposure. "Since it's not easy to predict if an individual home's water is at risk for lead, the best thing all residents can do is get their water tested ," Krisztian said. "It's a free test that provides valuable information for families." Testing is available for free by contacting the Flint Water Plant at 810-787-6537 and pressing 1, or by emailing flintwater@citvofflint.com. For more information about water samples received through the state's free testing program, visit www.michigan.gov/flintwater. How school sampling was conducted To conduct this comprehensive sampling, the DEQ and Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs began on Oct. 23 with a thorough plumbing assessment of the school to gain a comprehensive understanding of how water moves through the building and what types of plumbing materials are used. The assessment also identified 31 faucets or fountains in the school that provide water for drinking, cooking and/or food preparation . On Oct. 24, the DEQ and DLARA took four, 125-milliliter samples from each of the 31 identified faucets and fountains. The first two samples were taken immediately after turning on the faucet, followed by a 30-second flush and then the third sample, followed by a 2-minute flush and then the fourth sample. These samples provided information on the impact of any lead sources in or around each specific faucet and fountain as well as its connecting plumbing. On Oct. 31, the DEQ and DLARA tool< an additional 30 samples, 10 each from three sites in the school. These 1-liter samples were taken consecutively, and provided information about the impact of any lead sources deep in the building's plumbing.

From: Murray, David (GOV) Sent: Thursday, Novem To: Snyder, Rick {GOV) (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Cleme (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; James (GOV) <RedfordJ@michigan.gov>; Posthumus, Dick (GOV} <Posthumusd@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Baird, Richard {GOV) <bairdr@michiga n.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfels@michigan.gov>; Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) <forstnernl@michigan.gov>; Scott, Allison {GOV) <scotta12@michlgan.gov>; Walsh, John (GOV) <WalshJ@michigan.gov>; Brownfield, Michael {GOV) <B rownfieldM2@m ichigan.gov>; Wisniewski, Wendy {GOV) <wisniewsl<iw@michigan.gov>; Mcbride, Bill (GOV} <mcbrideb@michiga n.gov> Subject: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release Good evening Governor and team, We're working with the Department of Health and Hum an Services on its release of blood lead level testing results, with some continuing discussions about messaging and timing. I've attached the draft press release, an informational graphic and talking points. This is a cha llenging situation to be sure, but I think these results are fairly enco uraging considering som e of t he heated rhetoric on this issue. We are discussing a "people first" approach to messaging, and perhaps issuing early next week rather than on at 9 :30a .m. on a Friday so it doesn't look like we are burying news. In a nutshell : · Blood lead level testing results released tod ay revea led that 24 of 963 adults and ch ild ren tested in Flint in October had elevated leve ls, accord ing to th e Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. MDHHS is working closely with the Genesee County Hea lt h Department to reach out to families testing with higher levels and help them ·reduce their exposure to lead sou rces. Information was gathered from tests administered citywide to 963 children and adults between October 1 and October 30. Eighteen peop le age 17 or younger had elevated blood lead levels. Six adults over the age 18 were identified w ith elevated blood lead levels.
1

·

·

Cl

The testing and follow-up work is part of our action pla n.

Dave Murray Deputy Press Secretary I Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder MurrayOl@michlgan.gov 517-335-6397, office

Twltter:@michlgandmurray

2

MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OIF HEALTH AND HUMAN SIERVU CES (1\/IUNMI~J BLOOD LEAD LE\/IEIL TEST RESULTS FOR fliNT ZIP CODES 48501-48507 SUMMAIRY AS OF OCTOBER 30, 2015
Number of People Tested for Lead in Flint

Executive Summary
This report.is generated by MDHHS to trade Blood Lead Level test results in Flint, Michigan. · Counts on this report inclupe both capillary and venous blood tests. People who have had multiple tests are counted only once. Since 10/1/2015, an additional 963 peopJe have been tested in Flint. Continued testing efforts by Genessee County Health Department, MDHHS and local medical personnel have identified 18 children with blood lead levels greater than or equal to SiJ.g/dL since 10/1/2015. Three percent of the children younger than 6 years old tested since 10/1/2015 have had blood lead levels greater than or equal to 5iJ.g/dl.
Total number of people tested for lead 4657 from 1/1/2013 to 4/14/2014 Total number of people tested for lead 5017 from 4/15/2014 to 9/30/ 2015 Total nu~ber of people ~ested (or le.ad
..

..

..

..

..

~irice fon./20').5: . . · ....

963

· ·

Children Younger than 6 Years Old with Blood Lead Levels (BLL) 2:SJ.lg/dl
Total number of children tested for lead 3811 from 1/1/2013 to 4/14/ 2014 Number of child Bll test results :?!5iJg/dl 112 from 1/1/2013 to 4/14/2014 Total number of children tested for lead 4156 from 4/15/2014 to 9/30/2015: Number of child Bll t est results ~S!lg/dl from 4/15/2014 to 9/30/2015:
..

·

181
385

· Additional testing is ongoing. Counts will vary as new results are added.

Total number of children tested for lead since lOil/2015~ Number of child BLL teSt results ~Spg/dl since 10/1/2015: . . .

.
Adults (18 Years or Older) with Blood Lead Levels (BLL) 2:5~g/dL
Total number of adults tested for lead from 1/1/2013 to 4/14/2014 Number of adult Bll test results :?!5J1g/dl from 1/1/2013 to 4/14/2014 Total number of adults tested for lead from 4/15/2014 to 9/30/2015: Number of adult Bll test results :?!SJlg/dl from 4/15/2014 to ~/30/2015 :
·- · l

12

Children 6 to 17 Years Old with Blood Lead Leve ls (Bll) ~SJ.lg/dl
Total number of children tested for lead from 1/1/2013 to 4/14/2014 Number of child Bl.l test results ~SiJg/dl from 1/1/2013 to 4/14/2014 676

170
22 207

5

Total number of children tested for lead 654 from 4/15/2014 to 9/30/2015:

-

13
·2·8~

Number of child Bll test results ~SJ.Ig/dl from 4/15/2014 to 9/30/2015:
Tota~ numb,~r of chiidren test~d for lead

7

..

To·t:al number .. ·· . of adults tested for lead since 10/1/2015:
·'

since 10/1/2015:
·.
~um~er of child
' .
" .

289
6

'
~umber

of adult Bll test results ~51Jg/!i!since 10(1/1,0').5;
. ..

6
. ·.

..

Bll test results ~51Jg/dL since 10/1/201,.5:

STATE OF MicHIGAN
RICK SNYDER
GOVERNOR

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
LANSlNG

NICI<LYON
DIRECTOR

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE DRAFT

CONTACT: Jennifer Eisner (517) 241-2112

MDHHS releases October data outlining blood lead levels in Flint Results show 24 of963 people tested had elevated levels
LANSING, Mich. - Blood lead level testing results released today revealed that 24 of 963 adults and children tested in Flint in October had elevated levels, according to the Michigan Deprutme1it of Health and Human Services. MDIDIS is worldng closely with the Genesee County Health Depattment to reach out to families testing with higher levels and help them reduce their exposure to lead sources. Infmmation was gathered fi:om tests administered citywide to 963 children and adults between October 1 and October 3 0. Eighteen people age 17 or younger had elevated blood lead levels. Six adults over the age 18 were identified with elevated blood lead levels. The repmt is intended to inform residents about blood lead level testing efforts in Flint and provide cumulative total numbers. "Our goal is to help families reduce their exposure to lead sources," said Dr. Eden Wells, chief medical executive with the MDHHS. "We have made progress in testing and identifying those with elevated blood lead levels, and the department will continue to work closely with county health depmtment to reach these families. We will update these numbers on a regulru· basis and remain diligent in our ongoing outreach and education." The data in the report include the total number of tests conducted and the total number of elevated blood lead levels greater than 5 micrograms per deciliter, and captures both capillary and venous blood tests. People who have had multiple tests ru·e COlmted only once. The full report is posted online at www.michigan.gov/flintwater and will be updated as more data becomes available. The testing is part of the state's action plan to address health concems related to Flint's water infrastructure. Last month, MDI-IRS collaborated with the county health depmtment and local prutners to distribute educational resources and informational letter to Flint parents regarding lead testing. GCHD nursing staff are conducting direct outreach to families when an elevated blood lead level has been detected, serving as an important resources by addressing questions and concerns, providing information, 8lld meeting them in their home environment. MDHHS continues to provide :fi:ee water filters and replacement cartridges to Flint residents at fom~ locations including the MDI-IT-IS Flint offices and the Genesee Colmty Community Action
201 TOWNSEND STREET · LANSING, MICH IGAN 48913 www.mlchigan.gov/mdhhs · 517-373-3740

www.micbigan.gov/fliutwater. To help residents properly install water filters, and to demonstrate how to replace the original when it expires, MDHHS has created an instructional on the MDHHS YouTube chrumel. For additional updates on Flint water including updates on blood lead levels and testing results, visit www.michigan.gov/flintwater.

###

201 TOWNSEND STREET · LANSING, MI C HIGAN 4U9 '13 www.mlchigan.gov/mdhhs · 517-373-3740

Blood Lead Levels in Flint Tallcing Points November 18, 2015

Blood Lead Level Testing Results
· The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services is releasing a report r~garding blood lead leve ls in Flint chi ld ren and adults in zip codes 48501-48507. The purpose of the report is to inform residents about blood lead level testing efforts in Flint and ·provides cumu lative tota l numbers. It is not intended to be a technical report but a technical description, and further ana lysis ofthe data in the report is underway. The data in the report includ e the total number of tests conducted and the total number of elevated blood lead leve ls ;:::5~-tg/d l (micrograms per deciliter), broken down by date and age ranges. o Specifically, the current report breaks down the data by the 16 months prior to the switch in water source for Flint (January 1, 2013 through April14, 2014), to the 17 months after the switch (April15, 2014 through September 30, 2015), and after the lead exposure prevention campaign was initiated by th e State in Flint October 1, 2015 to October 30, 2015. These numbers will continue to be updated. The report also breaks down the number of tests and elevated blood lead levels · by children younger than 6, chi ldren ages 6~17, and adults 18 years and older. · Lead exposure for children younger than 6 is of particular concern because they are more sensitive to the effects of lead and tend to absorb more than older children and adu lts.

·

·

·

o

·

Data in the report includes both capillary and venous blood tests. People who have had multiple tests are counted only once. 963 people were tested in Flint between October 1, 2015, and October 30, 2015, 18 children 17 years of age or younger had elevated blood lead levels. Six adults over the age of 18 were identified with elevated blood lead levels during this time as well.

·

·

With these testing results, MDHHS is working closely w ith the Genesee County Health Department to conduct case management to ensure that these families are receiving the follow up care they need- including add ition al blood testing and a home investigation to identify and help reduce t he potential for additional lead expos ure in their environment.

1

o

In addition to this report, MDHHS has zip code level data avai lable by quarter for 4850348507 by request. Zip codes 48501-48502 do have some cases, but the numbers are too small to relea se by quarter.

Water Filters and Replacement Filters
. e

Our first action item is to work close ly with our public and private partners to provide water filters to Flint residents and MDHHS clients. To meet this priority, the governor identified one million dollars in state funding to purchase water filters for Flint res idents. The Brita SAFF-100 filters being distributed by the department and GCCARD do meet the NSF/ANSI 53 standards for drinking water treatment units. The Brita faucet fi ltration system we are distributing are National Sanitation Foundation certified to reduce lead in drinking water. Free water filters and replacement cartridges are available to current Michigan Department of Health and Human Services cl ients and Flint residents who are on the Flint water system at four locations: o Flint residents who are not current MDHHS clients should visit one of two Genesee County Community Action Resource Department offices to obtain a filter. · o at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint

·

·

·

·

Current MDHHS clients in the city of Flint should visit their local MDHHS office: · At 125 E. Union St. or 4809 Clio Road

·

Staff will be onsite at all four locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute filters and assist residents who have questions about proper insta llation. Given the questions and concerns regarding the change in water source in Flint, MDHHS authorized the use of emergency services funding to provide water filters for MDHHS clients receiving assistance in the city.of Fl int. This funding will support active Family Independence Program (FIPL Food Assistance Program (FAPL Chi ld Development and Care (CDC), State Disability Assista nce (SDA), State Disability Assistance (SDAL or Social Security Insurance (SSI) recipients so that they can obtain filters that are National San itation Foundation (NSF) certified to remove lead and ANS I Standard 53. MDHHS has also posted an instructional video on the MDHHS YouTub e channel t o help residents properly insta ll water filters, and to demonstrate how to replace the origina l filter when it exp ires. o https:ljwww.youtube.com/watch?v=plsOvmH 0

·

·

·

·

MDHHS currently serves approximately 25,000 households in Flint.

2

Background Information
o

Initial analysis of MDHHS data found that blood lead levels of children in Flint have fo llowed an expected seasonal trend; due to small numbers further analysis was initiated. While this analysis of blood lead levels in Flint as a whole remains true, after a comprehensive and detailed review cjown to the zip code level, we have found that the state analysis is consistent with that pre~ented by Hu rley. Director Lyon is working closely with DEQ and the adm inistration to take active steps to reduce all potential lead exposures in Flint and across the state. Our Chief Medical Executive has been in commu nication with the lead investigator at Hurley Children's Hospital, and we co ntinue to work with Hurley, the city of Flint, local and state leaders to verify and analyze data trends. Zip code-level data does show that there has been an increase in elevated childhood blood lead levels in specific communities. o o This does not conclusively mean that the water source change is the sole ca use of the increase, but data do~s show an association. There is an increased proportion of children with elevated blood levels in several zip codes, particularly 03 and 04. These appear to have increased over the last 1.5 years. Lead exposure can occur from a number of different sources (such as paint, gaso lin e, so lder, and consumer products) and through different pathways (such as air, food, water, dust, and soil). Although there are several exposure sources, lead-based paint is sti ll the mo.st widespread and dangerous high-dose source of lead exposure for young children in the US and Michigan.

o

·

·

·

o

I

o

·

We reviewed MDHHS statewide data using th~ same methodology used by Hurley, lookin g at our numbers by zip code and age ranges, and filtering out non-Flint children.

· ·Routine surveillance of blood lead levels does not ana lyze data down to the zip code level. Detailed analysis like this occurs when there is reason to focus in on precise locations or populations.
o

MDHHS is working closely with the Michigan Department of Environmental Qua lity, Hurley Ch ildren's Hospital, the Genesee County Health Department, and community organizations to initiate f urther action steps. We understand that cost may be a barrier to following the recommendations for drinking water, which is why NSF-certified filters are being distributed to residents on the Flint water system free of charge.

o

3

o

MDHHS is recommending that residents follow the Public Health Advisory issued by the Genesee County Hea lth Department, as well as t ake further steps to reduce exposures t o all forms of lead in and around their hom es.

MDHHS Stats and Facts

·

'High Risk' Zip codes (48503 and 48504) o Blood lead level rates among children under six years of age in the high ri sk zip codes (48503, 48504) were 2.7 t imes higher t han the rest of Genesee County before the switch to Flint River Water. After the switch to Flint River Water, rates in the high risk Zip codes were 3.2 times that of the rest of Genesee County.

o

·

Other Zip codes in Flint o Rates of elevated blood lead levels among chi ldren under six years of age in other parts of t he city of Flint were 2 times that ofthe rest of Genesee County before the switch to Flint River Water. The magnitude of the elevated rate remained roughly the same during the period after t he wate r source switch.

o

·

Lead abatement through MDHHS was federally funded up until FY14 w hen Michigan began providing additional funds to abate homes. In FY14, $1.25 M Genera l Fund was add ed. In FY15, General Fund was bumped up to $1.75M and FY16,.General Fund remains at $1.75M.

·

Reducing and Removing Lead Exposure

·

Use only cold filtered w at er from the tap for drinking, cooking, and making baby f ormula. Hot water is more likely to contain higher levels of lead. The lead in household water usually co mes from the service line that conn ects your-house to the water m ain or th e plumbing in your house, not from the local water sup ply.

·

In housing built before 1978, it can be assumed that the paint has lead unless tests show otherwise . Make sure your child does not have access to peeling paint or chewab le surfaces painted with lead-based p aint. Children and pregnant women should not be present in housing built before 1978 that is undergoing renovation. They should not pa rticipate in activities that disturb old paint or in cleaning up paint debris after work is co mplet ed. Create barriers between living/play areas and lead sources. Until environmental cleanup is comp leted, you should clean and isolate all so urces of lead .

·

·

·

4

o

Close and lock doors to keep chi ldren away from chipping or peeling paint on walls. You can also apply temporary barriers such as contact paper or duct tape, to cover holes in walls or to block children's access to other so urces of lead.

o

Regularly wash children's hands and toys. Hands and toys can become contaminated from household dust or exterior soi l. Both can be lead sources. Regularly wet-mop floors and wet-wipe window components. Because house hold dust is a major source of lead, you shou ld wet-mop floors and wet-wipe horizontal surfaces every 2-3 weeks. o Windowsills and wells can contain high levels of leaded dust. They should be kept clean . If feasible, windows shou ld be kept shut to prevent abrasion of painted surfaces or opened from the top sash.

o

·

Take off shoes when entering the house to prevent bringing lead-contaminated soil in from outside. ' Prevent children from playing in bare soil; if possible, provide them with sandboxes. Plant grass on areas of bare soi l or cover the soil with grass seed, mu lch, or wood chips, if possible. o Until the bare soil is covered, move play areas away from bare soil.and away from the sides ofthe house. If you have a sandbox, cover the box w hen not in use to prevent cats from using it as a litter box. That will help protect children from exposure to animal waste.

·

· · ·

Avoid usin g makeup, containers, cookware, or tableware to store or cook foods or liquids that are not shown to be lead-free. Remove recalled toys and toy jewelry immediately from children. Shower and change clothes after finishing a task that involves working with lead-based products such as stained glass, making bullets, or using a firing range.

If possible, shower and change before returning home if your job requires you to w ork with or around lead. These jobs can include painting, plumbing, and some factory work.

WIC Children
· · There are 855 infants participating in WIC in Flint. We are working with partners at the United Way to ensure that WIC fam ilies have access to water filters and bottl ed water. In homes with infants on WIC, if the household has documentation from an official source documenting unsanitary water supply issues, that family may be eligible to receive ready-to-feed formula. Families should contact WIC to see if they are eligible. Each household will be considered on an individual basis. WIC cannot cover bottl ed water.

·

·
o

5

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Cc:
Subject: Attachments:

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) Tuesday, November 17, 2015 5:25 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV) Scott, Allison (GOV) FW: Privileged Attorney-Client Communication -Outline of Flint Drinking Water Issues DEQ's Outline of Flint Drinking Water Issues for Flint Water Task Force -Attorney Client Privilege Work Product -ll-16-2015.pdf

I thought you should see this. It's pretty interesting. Whether anyone accepts it as gospel is problematic, but it's good on background.
From: Anderson, Madhu (DEQ) Sent: Tuesday, November 17, 2015 11:20 AM To: Ken Sikkema (ksikkema@pscinc.com) <ksikkema@pscinc.com> Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Weber, Travis (GOV) <WeberT7@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayDl@michigan.gov>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfels@michigan.gov>; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) <LyonN2@michigan.gov> Subject: Privileged Attorney-Client Communication- Outline of Flint Drinking Water Issues

Ken -Attached is the outline of the Flint Drinking Water issue (in a question and answer format) we have prepared for you to share with your colleagues on the Governor's Flint Water Task Force. Please let me know if we can provide any other material in preparation for the meeting tomorrow.

Madhu R. Anderson Deputy Director, Economic and Strategic Initiatives

if 517 284 67021517 290 9653 L<J andersonm30@michigan.gov

1

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

City of Flint Drinking Water Outline prepared by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for the Flint Water Task Force

I.

INTRODUCTION
This document is intended to provide an overview of Michigan's implementation of the Safe Drinking Water Act, 1976 PA 399, as amended (Act 399), with respect to events in the city of Flint (City), Michigan.

II.

BACKGROUND 1. How has Flint historically obtained its drinking water?
The water system in the City was organized and built under private ownership in 1883 as the Flint Water Works Company to pump raw water from the Flint River to their consumers. In 1903, the system was converted to a municipally-owned corporation which supplied drinking water to the City. In 1967, the City became a customer of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) system. After the switch to DWSD, the City operated its water treatment plant as a standby plant for purposes of reliability in the event of an emergency, such as an interruption in service of the single pipeline from DWSD. In the last ten years, the water treatment plant was used as an emergency backup during two weeks in 2009: June 18 through June 20 and September 10 through September 13. As a backup emergency water treatment plant, the City was required to operate the water treatment plant quarterly to demonstrate the capability to produce drinking water in accordance with Act 399 and to keep mechanical equipment (such as valves, rubber seals, etc.) in good working order. Each quarter, the water treatment plant was test run and samples were taken of both raw water and finished water (post-filters). Since the water treatment plant was upgraded in the early 2000s, monitoring showed that the water treatment plant was performing as designed. Contractual obligations with DWSD did not allow treated water to be put into the City's distribution system during these test runs. Treated water was discharged to the Flint River in accordance with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. The test runs were for demonstration purposes, to keep the water treatment plant operational, and staff familiar with operation in the event it was needed in an emergency.

2. What State and Federal laws or rules exist to ensure safe drinking water is provided to City residents?
The federal Safe Drinking Water Act (federal SDWA) is the primary law that ensures the quality of Americans' drinking water. Under the federal SDWA, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) sets standards for drinking water quality and oversees the states, localities, and water suppliers who implement those standards.

1

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

The federal SDWA was originally passed by Congress in 197 4 to protect public health by regulating the nation's public drinking water supply. The law was amended in 1986 and 1996 and requires many actions to protect drinking water and its sources: rivers, lakes, reservoirs, springs, and ground water wells. (The federal SDWA does not regulate private wells which serve fewer than 25 individuals.) Originally, the federal SDWA focused primarily on treatment as the means of providing safe drinking water at the tap. The 1996 amendments greatly enhanced the existing law by recognizing source water protection, operator training, funding for water system improvements, and public information as important components of safe drinking water. This approach ensures the quality of drinking water by protecting it from source to tap. The most direct oversight of water systems is conducted by state drinking water programs. States can apply to the USEPA for "primacy," -the authority to implement the federal SDWA within their jurisdictions - if they will adopt standards at least as stringent as the US EPA's and enforce those standards. Michigan adopted the Safe Drinking Water Act in 1976 through Act 399 and has maintained primacy for the program since that time.

3. What is the USEPA's role as a regulatory agency in implementing the SDWA?
Federal and state governments share responsibility for administering drinking water programs. Under the federal SDWA, the USEPA is given the responsibility for developing national standards and regulations that apply to the nation's public drinking water systems and enforcing those standards, by working with states. Michigan's drinking water program is evaluated annually by the US EPA for compliance with the federal SDWA. Based upon these evaluations, the USEPA continues to find Michigan's drinking water program to be compliant with the federal SDWA.

4. What is the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's (DEQ} role as a regulatory agency in implementing the SDWA?
The federal SDWA permits states to accept oversight of the drinking water program under an agreement with the USEPA giving states primary enforcement responsibilities (or primacy). In addition to this delegation of federal authority to the states, states also have the power to create additional regulations and programs governing drinking water suppliers through their own legislative and regulatory processes. Michigan has had regulatory authority of public water supplies since 1913 (Waterworks and Sewerage Systems, 1913 PA 98). The DEQ has been granted primary enforcement authority in Michigan for the federal SDWA under the authority of Act 399. As such, the DEQ, Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance, has regulatory oversight for all public water supplies, including approximately 1,400 community water supplies and 10,000 noncommunity water supplies. A community water supply provides year-round service to 15 or more living units (homes, apartments, dorm rooms, etc.) or 25 or more residents. A noncommunity water supply has 15 or more service connections or serves 25 or more individuals on an average daily basis for not less than 60 days per year.

2

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

The DEQ engages in a variety of activities to help water systems remain in, or return to, compliance. These activities include: conducting surveillance visits (inspections) at water systems and reviewing facilities, equipment, and operations; requiring the submission of plans and specifications for waterworks system improvements and issuing construction permits; providing for the training, examination, certification and regulation of persons operating water supplies; helping systems incorporate preventive measures; and since 1996, providing financial assistance for system improvements.

5. What is the City's role in implementing the federal SDWA and Act 399?
State and federal programs develop regulations and perform oversight and compliance activities, but do not treat or deliver water to customers. At the local level, public and private water utilities collect, treat, and deliver drinking water to consumers in compliance with state and federal regulations. The federal SDWA and Act 399 set up multiple barriers against contamination. These barriers include: source water protection, multiple treatment components, distribution system integrity, proper operations oversight, and public information. As the owner of a public water system, the City is responsible for knowing and following all requirements under Act 399, such as ensuring proper design, construction, operations and maintenance, so that contaminants in tap water do not exceed the standards established by law. The City treats the water, and must test its water routinely for specified contaminants and report the results to the DEQ. If a water system is not meeting these standards, it is the water supplier's responsibility to notify its customers. The federal SDWA and Act 399 recognize that customers have the right to know what is in their drinking water and where it comes from. The City, like all water suppliers, must notify consumers when there is a problem with water quality. The City submits samples of its water for laboratory testing (monitoring) to verify the water it provides to residents meets all federal and state standards. How often and where samples are taken varies from system to system and from contaminant to contaminant. The DEQ provides an annual monitoring schedule to the City setting forth these requirements. In addition, the City is required to employ properly certified water operators that are trained and experienced to operate the treatment and distribution systems associated with the City's water system.

6. What approvals were needed from the DEQ in order for the City to begin using its water treatment plant full time?
The City had long ago been issued construction permits for raw water pumps to withdraw water from the Flint River and the City was grandfathered under the water withdrawal program (Part 327, Great Lakes Preservation, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended), as were all existing community public water systems at that time. There were no additional DEQ

3

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

permissions or authorizations required under Act 399 because the City already had approval to use the water treatment plant. Under Act 399, there are no licenses or permits required to operate public water systems. The City did apply for and obtained two construction permits prior to the water treatment plant changing from an emergency backup plant to full-time operation. These permits were for new chemical feed equipment, changes to the electrical service, etc.

Ill.

THE FLINT RIVER- IS IT A SAFE SOURCE OF DRINKING WATER?
Seventy-five percent of Michigan's population served by a public water supply receive their drinking water from surface water sources, the majority of which is withdrawn from the Great Lakes. However, several public water supplies in Michigan utilize water from inland rivers. All surface water sources require significant treatment in order to be safe for consumption. While all surface water sources must receive a high level of treatment, inland river sources present a greater challenge than water withdrawn from one of the Great Lakes because of rapidly changing water quality conditions. Under most circumstances, rivers are prone to greater fluctuations in temperature, have higher amounts of organic material, greater turbidity (suspended solids), and are more vulnerable to microbiological and viral contamination than Lakes Huron, Erie, Michigan or Superior. While the water chemistry in the Flint River differs from that in Lake Huron, it can still be treated in accordance with the federal SDWA and Act 399. The waterworks industry has the technology to treat wide ranging source waters to provide potable and palatable drinking water, including direct reuse of treated wastewater. Regardless of source water quality, all public water systems must comply with the same drinking water standards in the finished water. It is not the source water that reacts with the homeowners plumbing in the distribution system, but rather the finished water quality that is important. Treated water leaving the City's water treatment plant does not contain lead. In addition, the treatment process employed by the City includes lime softening to reduce the hardness in the river water. The City includes lime softening and pH adjustment primarily to improve aesthetic water quality associated with hardness. Lime softening is not a process that water supply professionals would expect to increase corrosivity of water. The City, however, does practice recarbonation to readjust pH at the end of the softening process. pH levels of finished water leaving the City's water treatment plant averaged 7.7. Expanded water monitoring conducted quarterly at 25 sample sites located throughout the distribution system showed the following: July- September 2014 October- December 2014 January- March 2015 April -June 2015 average average average average pH= pH = pH= pH= 7.71 7.88 7.81 7.63 range: range: range: range: 7.56- 7.86 7.62 - 8.10 7.60- 7.99 7.48- 7.80

4

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

The data below was obtained at ten of the sampling locations throughout the City's distribution system, while they were still purchasing water from DWSD before the City switched to the Flint River as a source: January- March 2014 (DWSD) average pH= 7.47 April2014 (DWSD) average pH= 7.49 range: 7.40- 7.54 range: 7.42- 7.59

Note that the pH of the treated water produced while the City was using the Flint River did not differ significantly from pH values seen in the distribution system during the time the City purchased water from DWSD. Thus, pH monitoring provided no indication of a change in water corrosivity.
IV.

E. COLI AND TOTAL COLIFORM BACTERIA VIOLATIONS
1. What caused the E. coli and total coliform bacteria violations experienced by the City in August and September 2014?

A number of factors, primarily related to distribution system operation and maintenance, likely contributed to the Boil Water Advisories in the City during August and September 2014 triggered by exceedances of bacteria standards in limited areas of the distribution system. In addition, the coliform detections were confined to less than 20 percent of the water system. Had the detections been the result of a failure in treatment, detections would have been expected throughout the City rather than in such a limited geographic area. Instead, the violations seem to have been caused by other factors such as aging infrastructure. The City's water distribution system has suffered from a lack of infrastructure investment and asset management. Most of the City's over 550 miles of water mains are now over 75 years old, and constructed of unlined cast iron piping. This cast iron pipe is subject to tuberculation, which thins and weakens the pipe walls in some areas and causes a buildup of sediment and debris on the pipe walls in other areas. Tuberculation can lead to water quality issues as well as reduced flows and pressures. Tuberculation also encourages the development of biofilms. Biofilrn growth may occur more frequently in areas where little or no disinfectant is maintained. The City has also experienced decades of a declining customer base and water use, with vacant homes, commercial businesses, and industrial property. Declining water use leads to excess residence time (water age) within the City's distribution pipes and water storage facilities, accelerating tuberculation, biofilm growth, and reductions of disinfectant concentration in the distribution system. While the City has recently seen an infusion of funding for blight removal, contractors using fire hydrants to complete this work have been known to cause hydraulic disturbances that dislodge and suspend settled debris, which may contribute to the bacterial contamination. These hydraulic disturbances were also believed to be a source of the aesthetic water quality complaints both the City and the DEQ were receiving. The winter of 2013-2014 was also one of the coldest experienced by the water system. The City, which historically has unaccounted water losses of over 30 percent, saw even greater losses since February 2014 due to an increase in cold weather-related water main breaks and leaks (City personnel reported 400 water

5

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

main breaks in calendar year 2014, with greater than 50 percent in the winter quarter). The City has also been lacking a formal maintenance program for its more than 7,250 valves, which are critical in limiting the areas impacted during water main repairs. As an example, two valves on the transmission line used to supply the area of the 2014 Boil Water Advisories were found to be closed during the City's investigation of possible sources, causing much longer residence times, reduced disinfectant concentrations, and reduced pressures- all potential avenues for contamination to enter a distribution system. The Boil Water Advisories also occurred during the warmest and relatively wet periods of August and September 2014. Warm weather conditions are not only more conducive to bacterial growth but also degrade disinfectant concentrations more quickly. As already explained, longer residence times, biofilms, and tuberculation contribute to lowered disinfectant concentrations. Warm, wet weather conditions also allow water contaminated with bacteria to accumulate or pond around piping that leaks and breaks. During the summer of 2014, the City was actively repairing the distribution system (City personnel reported 29 water main breaks in June through August 2014). After the switch to the Flint River, it was discovered that there were many broken or closed valves in the distribution system (City personnel reported 120 broken valves and 239 valves in an improper position). As the City began correcting these problems, they did detect the presence of coliform organisms in the distribution system in testing conducted as a result of the repairs. This sporadic detection is not an unusual occurrence. Many communities have experienced similar issues when significant repairs are made in the system and/or they suffer water main breaks and localized pressure losses.

2. How were the violations detected? What was the DEQ's response?
Federal SDWA regulations regarding monitoring and standards for bacteria in water distribution systems are incorporated into Act 399. There are a variety of bacteria, parasites, and viruses which can potentially cause health problems if humans ingest them in drinking water. Testing water for each of these potential pathogens would be difficult and expensive. Instead, community water systems are required to test monthly for total coliform and E. coli. Total coliform bacteria, while not pathogenic, often originate from the same sources as many pathogens. Therefore, the presence of total coliform in drinking water indicates there may be a pathway for pathogens or other contaminants to enter the system. The absence of total coliforms in the distribution system indicates a minimal likelihood that pathogens are present. E. coli is itself a pathogen and its detection is considered direct evidence of a health risk. The Boil Water Advisories which occurred in the City were associated with bacteria monitoring detections and violations of bacteria standards. These advisories were issued by the City after consultation with the DEQ. Upon receiving information indicating total coliform and E. coli bacteria had been detected, the DEQ advised the City to issue a Boil Water Advisory from August 15 through 20, 2014, for the affected portion of the City. Another Boil Water Advisory was issued from September 5 through 9, 2014, due to localized detections of total

6

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 201S

coliform bacteria in the same and adjacent portions of the City. The advisories covered an area of less than 20 percent of the water department's service area. Once a Boil Water Advisory has been issued, time is needed to investigate potential causes and implement corrective measures. The larger the water system, the more time this may take. Once corrective measures have been taken, samples must be collected and analyzed to confirm that bacteria are no longer present. Under approved analytical methods used by the City, samples must be incubated for 24 hours before results can be obtained. In situations where the bacterial contamination has been confirmed, two consecutive rounds of safe samples collected at least 24 hours apart are normally obtained before canceling a Boil Water Advisory. Adding each of these steps together, a normal response period to rescind a Boil Water Advisory under these circumstances would be expected to take 3 to 4 days. V. TOTAL TRIHALOMETHANES (TTHM) VIOLATIONS 1. What caused the TTHM violations experienced by the City beginning in late summer 2014? Disinfectants are an essential element of drinking water treatment because of the barrier they provide against waterborne disease-causing microorganisms. However, disinfection byproducts form when disinfectants used to treat drinking water react with naturally occurring organic materials in the water (e.g., decomposing plant material). The formation of disinfection byproducts continues to occur as water travels throughout water distribution systems. A major challenge for water suppliers is how to provide protection from pathogens while simultaneously minimizing health risks to the population from disinfection byproducts. Total Trihalomethanes (TTHM- chloroform, bromoform, bromodichloromethane, and dibromochloromethane) and halogenated acetic acids (HAAS- monochloro-, dichloro-, trichloro-, monobromo-, dibromo-) are widely occurring classes of disinfection byproducts. The amount of TTHM and HAAS in drinking water can change depending on the season, water temperature, amount of chlorine added, the amount of plant material in the water, and a variety of other factors. All community water systems that chemically disinfect or purchase water that has been chemically disinfected are required to monitor for disinfection byproducts. The Flint River has higher levels of organic material than water in the Great Lakes and as a result, the water produced by the City developed higher disinfection byproducts than the water purchased from DWSD. Because the water treatment plant was previously operating intermittently, it was not possible to predict disinfection byproduct levels at distribution system compliance points until the City began relying on its water treatment plant continuously. As mentioned previously, the City became aware that there were numerous broken valves and closed valves that should have been open in the distribution system. At that time, the City also began a mapping effort to identify "water age" in the distribution system. The longer the residence time or "water age" the greater the opportunity for the formation of disinfection byproducts.

7

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

2. How were the violations detected? What was the DEQ's response?
Disinfection byproducts are monitored at eight sites throughout the distribution system. A locational running annual average is calculated for each individual site. Because TTHM and HAA5 maximum contaminant levels are calculated based on a running annual average at specific distribution system locations, the actual violation of the standard did not occur until the fall of 2014. However, because it was apparent in the summer of 2014 that the standard would eventually be exceeded; the DEQ asked the City to proactively implement measures to address the problem before the violation required them to do so. As a result of maintenance efforts undertaken by the City to repair valves and correct improperly closed valves, the City was able to improve water flow in the distribution system and thereby reduce residence time or "water age" in the system. Operational changes made to reduce the amount of storage in the system also helped reduce residence time which contributed to a reduction in disinfection byproduct formation. In addition to operational changes to minimize residence time in the distribution system, the City added granular activated carbon to its filters in July 2015. Levels of TTHMs and HAA5s were reduced and the City returned to compliance on September 1, 2015.

VI.

THE TASTE, ODOR, AND COLOR COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BY FLINT 1. What caused the taste, odor, and color complaints received by the City from residents?
Taste, odor, and color issues are very personalized. While water leaving the water treatment plant did not have any unusual taste, odor or color; during the summer after the switch to the Flint River, customer complaints increased. Construction in the distribution system, hydrant flushing, and changes in flow characteristics are all known causes of disturbances within the distribution system that can cause an increase in taste, odor, and color complaints. Aesthetics, such as taste, odor, and color, while a concern, by themselves are not a threat to public health.

2. What was the DEQ's response?
The DEQ consulted with the City regarding these complaints. The City indicated that they were offering to investigate such complaints for anyone that had issues; but City personnel informed the DEQ that they were not able to recreate these situations in the field. In addition, as a result of the repair work that was underway and the increased flushing to reduce water age in the system to help control TTHMs, it was anticipated that there would be short-term disturbances in the system that would cause color and odor complaints. All water supplies are advised to provide notice to residents prior to undertaking a flushing program because flushing (even routine flushing) often causes temporary problems as described. Based on information from City personnel, it appeared that the complaints were related to such operational activities occurring in the distribution system.

8

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

VII.

LEAD ISSUES IN THE FLINT DRINKING WATER 1. What causes lead in drinking water?
Lead is rarely found in source water. Lead enters tap water through corrosion of plumbing materials. Homes built before 1986 are more likely to have lead fixtures and solder. Older homes built prior to World War II are more likely to contain lead pipes. The most common problem with newer construction is with brass or chromeplated brass faucets and fixtures which can leach significant amounts of lead into the water, especially hot water. The amount of lead in tap water also depends on the types and amounts of minerals in the water, how long the water stays in the pipes, the arnount of wear in the pipes, the pH of the water, and its temperature.

2. What is the Lead and Copper Rule?
On June 7, 1991, the USEPA published a regulation to control lead and copper in drinking water. This regulation is known as the Lead and Copper Rule (also referred to as the LCR). The treatment technique for the rule requires systems to monitor drinking water at customer taps. If the 90th percentile for lead exceeds an action level of 15 parts per billion (ppb) or the 90th percentile for copper exceeds an action level of 1.3 parts per million (ppm), the system must undertake a number of additional actions to control corrosion. If the action level for lead is exceeded, the water supply must also inform the public about steps they should take to protect their health and the water supply may have to replace lead service lines under their control.

3. What is the lead action level?
For most contaminants, the USEPA sets an enforceable regulation called a maximum contaminant level based on the maximum contaminant level goal. Maximum contaminant levels are set as close to the maximum contaminant level goals as possible, considering cost, benefits, and the ability of public water systems to detect and remove contaminants at the water treatment plant using suitable treatment technologies. Because lead contamination of drinking water often results from corrosion of the plumbing materials belonging to water system customers, the USEPA established a treatment technique rather than a maximum contaminant level for lead. A treatment technique is an enforceable procedure or level of technological performance which water systems must follow to control a contaminant. Although the maximum contaminant level goal for lead is zero, based upon the above factors, the US EPA has established the action level for lead at 15 ppb. The treatment technique regulation for lead requires water systems that produce drinking water to control the corrosivity of the water. The regulation also requires systems to collect customer tap samples from sites served by the system that are more likely to have plumbing materials containing lead. If the 90th percentile action level for lead is exceeded, then water systems are required to take additional actions including: · Optimizing corrosion control treatment (for water systems serving greater than 50,000 people that have not fully optimized corrosion control).

9

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

· ·

Educating the public about lead in drinking water and actions consumers can take to reduce their exposure to lead. Replacing the portions of lead service lines (lines that connect distribution mains to customers) under the water system's control.

4. Did DWSD have optimized corrosion control treatment?
After the LCR passed in 1991, DWSD and all of its consecutive customer systems conducted two rounds of monitoring for lead and copper. Copper levels were well below action level limits, but lead levels exceeded the action level of 15 ppb for DWSD and many of its customer communities. As a result, DWSD installed corrosion control treatment. DWSD performed a corrosion control study and concluded that they could reduce the corrosivity of the water by the addition of an orthophosphate, a corrosion inhibitor.

5. Did the DEQ require the City to have corrosion control in place when it switched to the Flint River as its source of drinking water?
No. There are two ways under the LCR to deem a water supply as providing "optimal corrosion control" -either by sampling and determining through a calculation that the supply is "optimal" or by installing treatment if it is needed. The DEQ requested that the City perform two 6-month rounds of monitoring to demonstrate if the City was practicing optimal corrosion control treatment. According to state regulations [R325.1 0604f(2}(b)(iii)], a system can demonstrate optimized corrosion controls by sampling in two, consecutive 6-month monitoring periods and comparing the results of this monitoring to the lead level in the source. Optimal corrosion control under this scenario would be defined as having the 9oth percentile in each of these monitoring periods lower than the sum of the lead in the source and the practical quantification limit for lead of 5 ppb. Since the source water has 0 ppb lead, the City would have been deemed optimal if its 90th percentile of lead was 5 ppb or less in these two consecutive periods. However, once a system has installed treatment, it would also be considered optimized regardless of the 90th percentile level achieved, as long as it does not exceed the action level of 15 ppb. In this case, the City had been purchasing water from DWSD that was treated for corrosion control. It was the DWSD water system that was considered as having optimized corrosion control at that point. Since the City water system had not been the supplier of water before, the DEQ did not require the City to maintain corrosion control for which it was not responsible [R325.10604f(2}(b)]. It could not "maintain" operations undertaken elsewhere by a different entity for a different source of water. The DEQ's instructions to the City were consistent with past practices afforded to all other large water systems. At the beginning of the LCR, all large systems were initially granted the option to demonstrate optimal corrosion control treatment through full-scale monitoring under the applicable rules. For these reasons, two 6-month rounds of monitoring, as required by the LCR, were the required means to determine whether or not optimal corrosion control was being achieved.

6. How does the DEQ calculate the 90th percentile?
To determine the 90th percentile of a list of lead or copper results, the procedure below is followed:

10

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

Step 1: Place lead or copper results in ascending order Step 2: Assign each sample a number, 1 for lowest value Step 3: Multiply the total number of samples by 0.9- this yields the 90th percentile sample. For example: 20 samples x 0.9 = 18th sample. This is the 90th percentile level. Calculating the 9oth percentile is easiest when a supply collects 10 samples (or a multiple of 10). Note that the 9oth percentile rnust be interpolated if the number of samples is not a multiple of 10.

7. What was the result of the first round of monitoring conducted by the City?
The first 6-month round of lead and copper monitoring conducted by the City ended on December 31, 2014. One hundred samples were submitted and the 90th percentile lead level was calculated to be 6 ppb. The next step required by the DEQ was for the City to collect a second round of monitoring.

8. What was the result of the second round of monitoring conducted by the City?
The second 6-month round of lead and copper monitoring conducted by the City ended on June 30, 2015. Sixty-nine samples that complied with the site selection criteria were submitted and the 90th percentile lead level was calculated to be 11 ppb. The conclusion from these results was that the City, while in compliance with the action level, exceeded the level required to be deemed as having optimized corrosion control.

9. Why was the City required to collect 100 compliance samples for lead and copper in the first 6-month monitoring period of July through December of 2014 and then only 60 compliance samples in the second 6-month period of January through June of 2015?
The number of compliance samples required for lead and copper is based upon the population served by the water system as identified in the table below, taken from Rule 325.1071 Oa of Act 399. Supply Size (Number of People Served) More than100,000 10,001 to 100,000 3,301 to 10,000 501 to 3,300 101 to 500 Fewer than 101 Number of Sites (Standard Monitorin~) 100 60 40 20 10
5

Number of Sites (Reduced Monitoring) 50 30 20 10

5
5

The number of samples the City was required to collect in the first round of monitoring after they began relying on the Flint River was based on the 2010 census, which listed the City's population as more than 100,000 residents. In March of 2015, the City provided updated information that indicated the City's population had decreased to less than 100,000. Therefore, they were only required to collect 60 samples. There is no rule prohibiting the collection of additional compliance samples -only establishing a minimum number necessary.

11

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

10. What actions did the DEQ order the City to undertake after the second round of monitoring? While the City's LCR compliance monitoring continued to meet action level requirements, the City exceeded the level required to be deemed as having optimized corrosion control. Following receipt of the City's compliance monitoring results, the DEQ sent a letter on August 17, 2015, requiring the City to install corrosion control treatment. Under the LCR, the City has 6 months to let the DEQ know whether it intends to conduct a study, then 18 months to perform the study and make its recommendation, and 24 months to complete installation of the selected corrosion control. The DEQ requested the City accelerate this schedule. The City submitted plans and specifications to install corrosion control treatment and a construction permit was issued by the DEQ on October 28, 2015. The City is in the process of installing the necessary equipment and procuring the appropriate chemicals. Treatment is expected to be on-line by the end of November 2015. As of October 16, 2015, the City resumed purchasing water from DWSD that is already optimized and provides a corrosion inhibitor. The additional treatment by the City will further enhance the amount of inhibitor in the system. 11. What had Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) advised the DEQ regarding blood lead levels prior to the DEQ ordering the City to implement optimized corrosion control? In an e-mail dated July 28, 2015, regarding blood lead testing, the Michigan DHHS indicated that they: " ... compared lead testing rates and lead testing results to the same time frame for the previous 3 years, to see if there were any patterns that suggested that there were increased rates of lead poisoning after the water supply was switched. Per the attached charts · Lead testing rates remained about the same from year-to-year. .. City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age with First-Time Elevated Blood Lead Levels
30 20 10
0
May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr

-2011-2012

-2012-2013

~2013-2014

---2014-2015

12

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

There was a spike in elevated blood lead tests from JulySeptember 2014 ... City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age Tested for Lead Poisoning
600 500 400 300 200 100
0
May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr

-2011-2012

-2012-2013

~-~2013-2014

····-2014-2015

However, that pattern was not terribly different from what we saw in the previous three years; especially in 2011-2012 (we are working with our Epidemiologist to statistically verify any significant differences). We commonly see a 'seasonal effect' with lead, related to people opening and closing windows more often in the summer, which disturbs old deteriorating paint on the windows, sills and sashes. Window fans frequently blow and spread the lead dust from the deteriorating paint to other parts of the room/house. We suspected that the summer data spike may be related to this effect. If the home water supply lines and/or river water were contributing to elevated blood lead tests, we expected that the increased rates would extend beyond the summer, but they drop quite a bit from September to October, stayed low over the winter, and are just starting to tail up again in the spring of 2015." This e-mail from DHHS in concert with the completion of two 6-month rounds of lead compliance sampling data indicating that the City had not exceeded an action level for lead provided the basis for the DEQ to maintain that the water in the City continued to be in compliance with the federal SDWA and Act 399. 12. When did the DEQ first become aware of allegations of elevated blood levels being detected in certain children? The DEQ was notified on August 23, 2015, by a professor from Virginia Tech that "over the next few months we will be studying Flint water quality issues ... " Results indicating elevated lead levels in homes were reported as part of this study in late August. In September 2015, information was reported in news articles that

13

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

pediatricians in the City had data suggesting an increase in children's blood lead levels in two zip codes in the Flint area. Prior to these dates, the City had already completed the required two 6-month rounds of monitoring and the DEQ had made a determination that the City must install corrosion control treatment as documented in correspondence dated August 17, 2015.

VIII.

QUESTIONS RAISED REGARDING THE DEQ'S ACTIONS

1. What was the DEQ's response to the USEPA's inquiry in February 2015 regarding the optimized corrosion control treatment being implemented by the City under the LCR?
The DEQ indicated that the City was complying with the LCR, the lead 90th percentile level was below the action level of 15 ppb, and the City was already conducting the second round of monitoring which would provide for a determination of whether additional treatment needed to be installed. It should be noted that once treatment is designated as optimal, there is no requirement in the LCR that lead results be lower than they were before treatment was installed. The 90th percentile only needs to be lower than the action level in the LCR.

2. Did the DEQ attempt to mislead the USEPA in a February 27, 2015, e-mail responding to the USEPA's inquiry regarding Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment?
No. There was no attempt by the DEQ to mislead the US EPA. There is an e-mail from Steve Busch, Jackson and Lansing District Supervisor, Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance, indicating that the City was practicing a corrosion control program. What was meant was that the City was performing the required monitoring to determine whether or not they were practicing optimized corrosion control. The DEQ subsequently clarified its position in follow-up e-mails and telephone conversations with the US EPA.

3. When General Motors announced its intent to terminate water service from the City and purchase water from Genesee County, should this have been a sign that there were concerns with the quality of the water after the switch to the Flint River?
No. General Motors made a decision regarding the quality of water for its manufacturing processes. At the time, the company indicated that the chloride levels were above limits acceptable as part of the manufacturing facility's limit for production purposes. The level of chlorides in the water treated by the City was not a human health or aesthetic concern. Chloride does have a secondary maximum contaminant level established by the USEPA, not for health-related concerns but rather for taste and aesthetic concerns. Concentrations greater than the secondary maximum contaminant level of 250 milligrams per liter (mg/1) become objectionable due to taste. According to the City's records, the chloride concentration in the Flint River water is generally about 45 mg/1 and the treated water chloride concentration leaving the water treatment

14

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

plant ranges between 55 and 65 mg/1. It should be noted that the City uses ferric chloride as its primary coagulant, although this does not add a significant amount of chloride to the finished water.

4. Has the USEPA subsequently admitted that the LCR is subject to differing interpretations such as that presented by the DEQ?
Yes. On November 3, 2015, the US EPA issued a memorandum regarding the "Lead and Copper Rule Requirements for Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment for Large Drinking Water Systems". This memorandum addresses concerns raised about the application of the LCR, specifically the requirements pertaining to maintenance of optimal corrosion control treatment, in situations in which a large water system ceases to purchase treated water and switches to a new drinking water source. The US EPA states that this type of situation rarely arises, that the language of the LCR does not specifically discuss such circumstances, and that there are differing possible interpretations of the LCR with respect to how the rule's optimal corrosion control treatment procedures apply to this situation. The memorandum is intended to clarify, on a prospective basis, steps agencies should take or apply in the future. US EPA's new guidance provides acknowledgement that the LCR is subject to differing interpretations. The DEQ's interpretation and application of the LCR in this situation was in compliance with the federal SDWA and Act 399.

5. Did the DEQ reject any of the samples submitted by the City?
Yes, samples at two locations were excluded from the compliance calculation in conformance with rules issued by the US EPA. According to the LCR, compliance samples must be a first draw, 1-liter sample collected from a cold water, kitchen or bathroom tap after the tap has stood unused for not less than 6 hours. Federal and state rules require community public water systems to identify a pool of targeted high-risk sampling sites, called Tier 1 sampling sites. For a municipality such as the City, the Tier 1 sampling pool must consist of single family structures that are: served by a lead service line, contain lead pipes, or contain copper pipes soldered with lead installed after 1982 but before Michigan enacted the ban on solder containing high concentrations of lead (June, 1988). As long as a community has Tier 1 sites that contain lead service lines, they are required to collect at least 50 percent of their compliance samples from these lead service line sites. Finally, federal and state rules specify that "Sampling sites may not include faucets that have point of use or point of entry treatment devices designed to remove inorganic contaminants." Such treatment devices include home softeners, iron fillers, etc. Samples collected from multiple family residences, commercial buildings, institutional facilities, or single family structures with point-of-use or point-of-entry treatment can only be used if the community has insufficient Tier 1 sites available.

15

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

One of the samples submitted by the City was excluded from the 9oth percentile compliance calculation in the latest monitoring period because it was taken from a tap at a non-residential site (non-Tier 1). The other sample result that was excluded was collected from a single family home that has a whole house treatment system. Both of these sites are, therefore, excluded from the compliance consideration based upon federal and state rules.

6. Did the DEQ review the information submitted by the City to ensure all samples were from Tier 1 sites?
Yes. The DEQ examined the information submitted and certified by the City that its LCR compliance monitoring sites consisted entirely of Tier 1 criteria sites, which met the requirements of this rule to maximize sampling of high-risk targeted sites. During the initial implementation of the LCR approximately 25 years ago, water supplies were required to complete a materials evaluation of their distribution system to identify a pool of targeted, high-risk sampling sites. These sites were to be categorized into one of three Tiers (1, 2, or 3) based on risk. The DEQ created an LCR reporting template for water systems to identify each compliance sampling site by Tier, service line material, and building plumbing material. If a water system has sufficient Tier 1 sites, they are required to sample them before using any lower Tier sites. Furthermore, if they have sufficient sampling sites with lead service lines, they are required to use them to make up at least 50 percent of their sampling pool each monitoring period. Water supplies are also required to use the same sampling sites. each time or explain on their LCR reporting form why they were unable to do so. Finally, the water system is required to certify all of the information they provide on the LCR reporting form is factual. The DEQ must rely upon the public water system to identify appropriate sampling sites for LCR monitoring. The DEQ public water supply program has no control or authority over service lines or domestic plumbing. As a result, we have no records on construction standards or materials used by customers for these components. If these records exist, they are kept by plumbing code enforcement officials. In 2015, City employees again certified that the information submitted on their LCR monitoring reports for the two 6-month rounds of monitoring conducted after they began treating the Flint River were accurate, and DEQ staff review of that information indicated it was in compliance with the monitoring requirements. The DEQ had no reason to question the validity of the City's reports until the DEQ heard City employees revealing to the media that the City did not know for certain if its compliance monitoring was collected from homes with lead service lines. As a result, the DEQ began to investigate the City's monitoring sites. As the City began to transfer its customer information to electronic. records, the DEQ determined from the information available that a significant number of these sites that had been listed as having lead service lines either did not have them or the information was unavailable. On November 9, 2015, the DEQ notified the City in writing that it would be necessary to conduct a complete assessment of its sampling pool and report back its findings by December 30, 2015. The DEQ is now awaiting the City's response.

16

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

7. Did the DEQ believe the levels of lead found at 212 Browning in April 2015 were indicative of a system-wide problem?
High levels of lead were collected in samples taken from this residence. It was determined to be coming from an unusually long lead service line. For some reason, this home was not connected to the water main that ran in front of the house, but rather to a main located on a street several houses away. The City replaced the lead service line May 6, 2015. Since the internal plumbing of the house is plastic, it was believed that replacement of the lead service line would resolve the problem, and subsequent sampling taken at this address showed that replacement of the service line did mitigate the problem. There was, therefore, no reason to believe that this was indicative of a system-wide problem.

8. Do the DEQ's sampling instructions comply with the LCR?
The DEQ continues to seek official clarification from the US EPA regarding the sampling protocols. The DEQ's sampling recommendations were developed to ensure compliance with the USEPA's guidance provided in the preamble to their lead and copper regulations that said that household use should be "typical" for a residential customer on the day before sample collection for lead and copper. Early in the implementation of the LCR, the DEQ had encountered too many situations where compliance samples had been collected from kitchen and bathroom taps that had not been used in days and in some cases, even weeks, resulting in excessively stagnated water and correspondingly high lead levels that did not represent typical exposure expected after overnight stagnation. To incorporate these results into further regulatory decision making could have led to actions that were not indicative of a true public health threat. Further complicating this issue was the US EPA's direct implementation of the LCR in Washington, D.C., where it was learned that some "valid" lead results were not always being included in compliance calculations. Subsequently, the USEPA made invalidation of samples for any reason much more difficult. In order to ensure samples were taken at customer taps representative of typical use, the DEQ devised the current recommendations for ensuring appropriate but not excessive stagnation for LCR monitoring. The DEQ continues to believe it is appropriate to ensure that taps being sampled are representative of typical household use and are sampled during the recommended stagnation period of 6-18 hours. The LCR does not say the result should represent the "absolute worst case" condition- it talks about sampling the highest risk locations (lead plumbing, lead service lines, high lead content solder piping, etc.) after overnight stagnation and then collecting a first draw sample so as not to flush elevated lead from that tap at that point in time. There are a number of other states that share the DEQ's interpretation of the rule and the DEQ encourages the US EPA to provide official clarification directed at all states with primacy.

17

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication

November 16, 2015

9. Does the DEQ require the use of small-neck bottles to obtain samples?
No. The DEQ does not mandate the use of small-neck bottles; it is the sampling method that is specified in both the federal SDWA and Act 399. Each certified drinking water laboratory provides bottles to their customers upon request for any particular analysis in accordance with the specifications in the SDWA. The bottles provided by the DEQ Drinking Water Laboratory for a lead and copper corrosion control sample meet these requirements.

18

From: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Sent: Thursday, December 03,201512:52 PM To: Murray, David {GOV) <MurrayD1@michigan.gov> Cc: Scott, Allison {GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth {GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov> Subject: Re: ACTION NEEDED on Flint water documents Please proceed as recommended. )hanks Rick Sent from my iPad On Dec 3, 2015, at 12:43 PM, Murray, David {GOV) <MurrayD1@michiga n.gov> wrote: Good afternoon Governor, Sorry for the quick turnaround time on this, but DHHS is hoping to issue the release t his afternoon to avoid issuing news on Friday. The DHHS team has answe red the questions and made significant revisions to the press release at my request. I think this is far more reader friendly and people focused. Here are the specific answers to the questions: Do the elevated lead levels stick with a person for life? We do see blood lead leve ls decrease after education takes place and exposure to lead sources is reduced. The purpose of screening children for lead is to identify those with elevated levels. Removing potential sources of lead exposure and ensuring proper nutrition and healthcare leads to decreases in blood lead levels in follow-up testing, which is an important part of case management. Lead has a halflife in blood of approximately 25 days; in soft tissue, about 40 days; and in the non-labile portion of bone, more than 25 years. Why do the lead levels spike on a seasonal basis? When reviewing historical trend data, the risk of lead exposure is highest during the third quarter of each year- July through September. Seasonal variation is the result of a number of factors including increased exposure to lead in dust and soil in the summer months. DHHS is requesting to issue this at 2 p.m. with Dr. Wells available to answer questions.. Thank you for your consideration .

1

Dave

.

The notifications will be timed as follows: 1:30 p.m. " Send final embargoed release and summary report to: o Genesee County Health Department- Geralyn Lasher o Dr. Mona Hannah-Attisha- Geralyn Lasher 9 Task Force Members- Geralyn Lasher o City of Flint Mayor's Office- Geralyn Lasher o Congress and legislature - Elizabeth Hertel 2 p.m. · Issue press release and summary report · Post press release and summary report to MDHHS website newsroom and Flint Water website, www.michigan.gov/flintwater Please let me know if you have any additional questions, ed its or concerns. Thank you, Jennifer Eisner
Public Information Officer Michigan Department of Health and Human Services Office: 517-241··2112 or EisnerJ@mlchigan.gov

<Flint EBL Data Press Release V9.docx> <Comms Plan- Flint EBL Data Summary 12315.docx> <Flint Blood Lead Level Summary Report Dec.pdt>

2

From: Murray, David '(GOV) Sent: Thursday, Decem To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV) Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis {GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth {GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov> Subject: ACTION NEEDED on Flint water documents Good afternoon Governor, Sorry for the quick turnaround time on this, but DHHS is hoping to issue the release this afternoon to avoid issuing news on Friday. The DHHS team has answered the questions and made significant revisions to the press release at my request. I think this is far more reader friendly and people focused. Here are the specific answers to the questions: ·
Do the elevated lead levels sticlc with a person for life? We do see blood lead levels decrease after education t akes place and exposure to lead sources is reduced. The purpose of screening children for lead is to identify those with elevated leve ls. Removing potential sources of lead exposure and ensuring proper nutrition and healthcare leads to decreases in blood lead levels in follow-up testing, which is an important part of case management. Lead has a half-life in blood of approximately 25 days; in soft tissue, about 40 days; and in the non-labile portion of bone, more than 25 years.

Why do the lead levels spike on a seasonal basis? When reviewing historical trend data, the risk of lead exposure is highest during th e third quarter of each year- July through September. Seasonal variation is the result of a number of fa ctors including increased exposu re to lead in dust and soil in the summer months.
DHHS is requesting to issue this at 2 p.m. with Dr. Wells available to answer questions. Thank you for your consideration. Dave

The notifications will be timed as follows:

1:30 p.m. o Send f inal embargoed r. elease and summary report to: o Genesee County Health Department- Geralyn Lasher
1

o o o

o

Dr. Mona Hannah-Attisha - Geralyn Lasher Ta sk Force Members - Geralyn Lasher City of Flint Mayor's Office- Geralyn Lasher Congress and legislature- Elizabeth Hertel

2 p.m.
o
o

Issue press release and summary report Post press release and summary report to MDHHS website newsroom and Flint W ater website,

www.michigan.gov/flintwater
Please let me know if you have any additional questions, edits or concerns. Thank you, Jennifer Eisner
Public Information Officer Michigan Department of Health and Human Services Office: 517-241-2112 or ElsnerJ@michlgan.gov

2

From: Ken Sikkema [mailto:l<sil<kema@pscinc.com] Sent: Monday, Decem 3:31 PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Chris·Kolb <chris@environmenta Davis <mattdav@med.umich.edu>; Lawrence Reynolds <reynolds@mottchc.org>; Eric Rothstein <erothste@grg-ltd.com>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <baird r@m ichigan.gov> Subject: Flint Water Advisory Task Force Recommendation

D ear Governor Snyder: We want to thank you for the recent conference call between members of the Flint Water Advisory Task Force (FWATF), yomself, and members of your administration. Attached is a follow-up letter to that conference call outlining an initial set of recommendations that we believe should be implemented in the very near future to focus the state's efforts to protect the public health in Flint. We both acknowledge and appreciate your personal interest in this issue and your commitment, not only to assisting the Task Force in our review, but--most importantly--to ensuring that the full measure of state resources are brought forward to protect the public health in Flint and throughout the state. Respectfully, Ken Sildcema

Ken Sikkema Senior Policy Fellow Public Sector Consultants

PFI: 517-484-4954
ksildcema@pscinc.com

1

December 7, 2015

De~rGovernorSnyde~

On Wednesday, November 18, 2015, the Flint Water Advisory Task Fo rce met with representatives of the Mich igan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services {N)DHHS} to discuss elements of the 10-point Action Plan designed t o address various issues related to the ongoing public health protection challenges precipitated by lead in the Flint water supply. These discussions were held at our request as part of our task to make recom mendations t o prevent a similar occurrence in Flint or elsewhere, and ·also to monitor ongoing mitigation efforts.
S~bsequent

to those meetings~ on Tuesday, November 24, 2015, members of the Ta sk Force

participated in a conference call with yourself, members of the Administration, and representatives of these agencies to discuss the progress to date on t he 10-point Action Plan, as well as several other related issues. We want to acknowledge the steps that have already been take n to implement the action plan, specifica lly in the areas of outreach efforts t o fa cilitate blood lead t.esting for children, communication with health care providers in the Flint community about the importance of t esting children for lead, and the training of additional public health nurses in the Genesee County Hea lth Department. We do believe, however, that additional steps need to be taken to re ach additional children for blood lead testing, assure proper follow-up with children found to have elevated blood lead levels, and t o continue water t esting. We will continue to assess state and local efforts and make recommendations rega rding specific steps that we believe are warranted. One prim ary concern we have at this point is that the current efforts appear to be taking place in the absence of a larger project coordination framework that measures resu lts and clearly delineates responsibilities for continuing actions to protect public health. We believe the state is best positioned to faci litate this larger framework, which should address the following: 1. 2. 3. 4. The need for MDHHS and MDEQ- and, possibly, other state agencies--to set goals for actions in th local and federa l agencies and organizations. collaboration wi_ The need for a set of corresponding timelines for the goals. The need to establish responsibility for meeting the goals in a timely fashion and for contingency plans for th e state if t he goa ls are not being met. The need for clear, regular communication with the Flint community and stakeholder groups regarding action steps and updates.

We also believe it important that a single person or entity-potentially independent of any one particular state agency and mutually agreeable to this Task Force and you, Governor-be established to provide effective coordina tion of ongoing activities and repo rting on the status of mitigat ion measures. For this, we also believe a readily understood "dashboard" should be developed that reports on the goa ls, til'"(lelines and assignments. This will enable members of the Flint community, public health providers, and state agencies to know about the status of the Flint water crisis mitigation program, as

well as promote coordinati on and accou ntability. The Task Force is prepared to assist in the development of that dashboard. We believe it is vitally important that truste d members of the Flint community be engaged in communication on this issue, as well as t he distribution of information conveyed by our suggested dashboard reporting. Accordingly, in advance of our fin al report, we would like to ensure the independent coord inator suggest ed above engage trusted community groups to begin rebuilding· community trust in st ate actions. We appreciate your personal interest in this issue, commitment to assisting t he Task Force in our review, and-most importantly-commitment to ensuring that the full measure of state resou rces are brought forwa rd to protect the public health in Flint and throughout the state. Respectfully yours,

Flint Water Advisory Task Force: Dr. Matt Davis Chris l<olb Dr. Larry Reynolds Eric Rothstein Ken Sikkema

From: Murray, David (GOV) Sent: Thursday, Dece 10 2015 3:56 PM To: Snyder, Rick Agen, Jarrod (GOV} <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Holland, Meegan (GOV} <HollandM2@mich igan.gov> Subject: REVIEW, please -- Draft Flint Water Task Force response
Good afternoon, Governor, Here is a draft response, pasted below and attached, to the letter from the Flint Water Task Force, incorporating suggestions from Rich and others. Please let me know if you want changes, and we'll prepare a version on letterh ead. Thank you for your time. Dave

Dear Flint Water Advisory Task Force Members, Thank you for your correspondence on Dec. 7, and, most importantly, f or your hard work to prom ote public health and protect ou r residents as we move forward. Your efforts are both respected and appreciated. As acknowledged in your letter, we have taken many steps to address the challenges in Flint as they relate to reducing lead exposure. I am pleased to see the progress since October, and recogn ize there is more work that must be done to ensure that this progress cont inues. At the state level, there has been a co nfluence of efforts between M ichigan Departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services t o coordinate with th e Genesee County Health Department, local schools, and our partners in the non-profit community. These partners are making progress, and w e know we must always strive to improve practices and communication for continual improvement. You make a so lid suggestion abo ut establishing a person who Is independent of any one of the involved stat~ agencies to serve as the point person to coordinate t he ongoing work. I am recommending th at Harvey Hollins, director of the Office of Urban Initiatives, carry out thi s effo rt. Harvey Is well-versed in t he issues and the challenges f aced by our cities and will be effective in this role. Seni or members of our executive t eam will conti nue to engage w ith your task f orce and provide direction and support to Harvey to ensure you will have continued support and cooperation. We also have retained Chris DeWitt, a veteran communications specialist, t o st rengthen community outreach efforts t o make sure residents have access to th e information they need.

1

I also support your suggestion of a dashboard to mal<e 11 11U II IIc.lliVII u ... v~ - - - · . . . · Flint community. These are critical measures that can be used as we look the challenges and progress in Flint, but also can be a part of efforts moving forward in other areas of our state. It's important that people have confidence that we are working to address any problems and w ill t ake the necessary actions to improve interaction among city, state and federa l agencies. We nlso will continue to worl< with t he medical community to consider how we can work together on w raparound needs of children w ho might experie nce hea lth problems. . People in Flint and across our stat e deserve saf e, clean water. I want t hem to be confident that the water coming out of their tap is safe for t heir fami lies. And I want t hem to trust that their government- at all levels- is working effectively to protect them. I thank you again for investing your time and expertise in this vitally important effort.

Dave M u rray Press Secretary I Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder MurrayDl@michigan.gov 517-335-6397, office Twitter:@mlchlgandmurray

2

Flint Water Advisory Task Force Members, Tha nk you f or your correspondence on Dec. 7, and, most Importantly, for your hard work to promote public healt h and protect our residents as we move forward. Your efforts are both respected and appreciat ed. As acknowledged in your letter, we have taken many steps to address th e challenges in Flint as they relate to reducing lead exposure. I am pleased to see the progress since October, and recognize there is more work that must be done to ensure that t his progress continues. At the st ate level, there has been a confluence of efforts between Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services to coordinate with the Genesee County Health Department, local schools, and our partners in the non-profit community. These partners are making progress, and we know we must always strive t o improve practices and communication for continual improvement. You make a solid suggestion about est ablishing a person who is Independent of any one ofthe involved state agencies to serve as the point person to coordinate the ongoing wo rk. I am recommend ing that Harvey Hollins, director of the Office of Urban Initiatives, carry out this effort. Harvey is well-versed in the issues and the cha llenges faced by our cities and will be effective in this role. Senior members of our executive team will continue to engage with your task force and provide direction and support to Harvey to ensure you will have continued support and cooperation. We also have re tained Chris DeWitt, a veteran communications specialist, to strength en co mmunity outreach efforts to make sure residents have access t o the Information they need. I also support your suggestion of a dashboard to make Information about our work and progress more accessible to the Flint community. These are critical measures th at can be used as we look the challenges and progress in Flint, but also can be a part of efforts moving forward in other areas of our state. It's Im portant that people have confidence that we are working to address any problems and will take the necessary actions to improve interact ion among city, state and federal agencies. We also will continue to work w ith the medical commun.ity to consider how we can work together on wraparound needs of children w ho might experience health problems. People in Flint and across our state deserve saf e, clean water. I want them to be confident that the water coming out of their tap is safe for their families. And I want them to trust that their government at all levels- is working effect ively to protect them. I thank you again for investing your time and expertise in this vitally important effort. Regards,

From: Mu rray, David {GOV) Sent: Friday, December 11, 2015 2:58 PM To: Snyder, Rick { G O V ) - Calley, Brian {GOV) uchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@~beth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; arrod {GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Posthumus, Dick {GOV) <Posthumusd@michigan.gov>; Redford, James (GOV) <RedfordJ@michigan.gov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey {GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Mcbride, Bill {GOV) <mcbrideb@michigan.gov>; Holland, Meegan {GOV) <HollandM2@michigan.gov>; Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) <forstnernl@michigan.gov>; Brownfield, Michael {GOV) <BrownfieldM2@michigan.gov>; Walsh, John (GOV) <WalshJ@michigan.gov> Cc: Sc~tt, Allison {GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Wisniewski, Wendy {GOV) <wisniewskiw@michigan.gov> Subject: New release on blood lead level testing in Flint. Good afternoon Governor and team, Just wanted to give you a heads up about a release DHHS is issuing today with updated blood lead level testing. Apout 500 more people have been tested since the last release, and eight more people had elevated levels. The format and information is similar to the previous release. DHHS plans to issue such updates every t hree weeks for the time being to show transparency, remind people that testing is available if they are concerned, and that free filters and replacement cartridges are available. I' ve pasted the release below. Have a nice weekend, Dave

December 11, 2015

MDHHS releases latest round of Flint blood lead level data
LANSING, Mich.- The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services today issued its newest summary report on lead testing in Flint According to preliminary data, 39 of 1,836 adults and chilchen tested had elevated blood lead levels since Oct. 1.

1

"As testing continues, our focus remains on11e1pmg rarrnHt~ 1uuu"" ua .P~ ·-··--to lead," said Dr. Eden Wells, MDI-II-IS chief medical executive. "We are working closely with the Genesee County Health Department to provide information and offer tools in the conmmnity, and encourage families to explore the resources that are available to them."
- - · L

Both capillary and venous blood tests are included in the report, and people who have had multiple tests are counted only once. Tests and their results cover the time since the state action plan was put in place on Oct. 2, and capture the number of elevated blood lead levels greater than 5 micrograms per deciliter. MDHHS is working closely with local partners to offer resom·ces and distribute important lead testing and prevention inf01mation. Additional state funding has allowed for Genesee Cmmty Health Department (GCHD) nurses to work with families when an elevated blood lead level is detected. These families can also choose to have the nmse coordinate an enviromnental health investigation in their home to identify lead exposures, which could be lead from paint, soil, plumbing, and other sources. To support these efforts, the state is coordinating with its Medicaid health plans and provider communities on enhanced screening and testing. In addition to mandated testing at ages one and two for the Medicaid population, MDHHS has recommended blood lead testing for any child younger than six years of age in Flint who has not previously been tested. The state, in coordination with GCHD, developed and issued a Health Ale1t Network (HAN) notification for local providers to help ensure consistent messaging and protocols among primary care providers. Free water filters and replacement cartridges are still available to Flint residents. For a full list oflocations and hours of distribution, or to view the full blood lead level report, visit www.michigan.gov/flintwater. The summary will be updated as more data becomes available. To help residents properly install water filters, and to demonstrate how to replace the original when it expll:es, MDHHS has created an instructional video on its YouTube channel. For this and other updates, visit www.michigan.gov/flintwater.

###
Dave Murray
Press Secretary I Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder MurrayDl@michigan.gov 517-335-6397, office \witter:@ mich igan murray

!'

2

<scotta12@michigan.gov> Subject: Briefing on Flint water blog post Colleagues, Here is a quick summary of a blog post that appears on f lintwaterstudy.org, based on 159 pages of DHHS emails requested by Virginia Tech researcher Ma rc Edwards under the Freedom of Info rmation Act. The headline: "Michigan Hea lth Department Hid Evidence of Health Harm Due to Lead Contaminated Water: Allowed False Public Assurances by MDEQ and Stonewa lled Outside Researchers" Major points: · Lee Ann Walters contacted DHHS nu rse l<aren Lishinski to discuss her child's high lead level. The response: "He is barely lead poisoned. If CDC had not changed their lead poisoning standard f rom 10 down to 5, we would not be having this conversation ... I am working with kids in their 40's and SO's. It is just a few IQ points ...it is not th e end of the world." · DHHS reached out to DEQ after some red flags about lead levels; Stephen Busch responded with inaccurate information . Even so, DHHS proceeded wit h studies on lead levels and fo und spiked levels for Q3 2014 and 2015 (third quarters- the summer months- often have season spikes). July 2015 memos indicate they could see something was awry, but the story implies that DHHS sat on the results. · In s·eptember 2015, Bra d Wurfel said a study was done and he used it to discredit data from Virginia Tech showing high lead levels. The blog post says Wurfel misrepresented the DHHS results and that DHHS "stood by and said nothing while M DEQ made false claims about what the blood lead data showed." · Virgin ia Tech's Marc Edwards requesteQ ~ater data on 9/2/15. He waited for several weeks for the information, and the article talks about how the request caused a flurry of ema ils at DHHS, particularly between Robert Scott and Nancy Peeler {who work in the childhood lead prevention program). The sto ry says the em ails sh ow the department was acting unethically because they appeared to be stonewalling Edwards and later Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha . DHHS' response: "The Michigan Department of Health and Huma n Services has been, and continues to be, committed to full disclosure of information regarding the city of Flint and blood lead levels. To suggest otherwise is not consistent with how we have responded.
1

"When initially looking at the citywid e and county elevated blood lead level numbers, the mcrease appea1eu to be consistent with the routine seasonal fluctuation see n in the summer months. It wasn't until the Hurley report came out that owr epidemio logists too k a more in-depth look at the data by zip code, controlling for seasonal variation, and confirmed an increase outside of normal trends. As a result of this process, we have de~ermined that th e way we analyze data co ll ected needs to be thoroughly reviewed. Our after action report will help determine how we conduct this process in the future. "Our department is focused on ensuring that appropriate case management and follow up is occurring in Flint. Summary reports outlining blood lead level testing are posted online on a bi-weekly basis, and we are working closely with local partners to fulfill data requests as we receive them. "Regarding the FOIA, Mr. Edwards received all of the requested documents, with personal information redacted, on Friday, December 18." Media response: We have received requests from The Flint Journal, The Detroit Free Press, Michigan Radio, Huffington Post, Rachel Maddow and Flint TV. If there are any questions, please feel free to ask away. Meegan Meegan Holland Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder Office: 517-335-6397

~

2

From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) Sent: Thursday, December 24, 2015 8:08AM To: Agen, Jarred (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan .gov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh @michigan.gov>; Walsh, John (GOV} <WalshJ@michigan.gov>; Calley, Brian (GOV)~···· Snyder, Rick (GOV) Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Scott, {GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov> Subject: BRIEFING: Auditor General answers on Flint water situation

Colleagues: Here is a summary of answers from the Office ofthe Auditor General in response to questions mostly posed by Sen. Jim Ananich's office (the auditor added a few questions in the 11-page report). The questions came as the OAG conducts an audit of the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance's handling of the Flint water crisis. Conclusions: While the City Council voted in March 2013 to move to the KWA pipeline, it didn't designat~ the Flint River as an interim water source . But the DEQ had approved th e river as a backup source for emergency purposes in 2006. The treated water met safety standards in quarterly tests by the Flint WTP, but Flint had never tested its effect on the distribution system. In an email review of key DEQ managers to determine if there wa s an effort to conceal information, only one email exchange raised red flags. The EPA had asked DEQ in February 2015 if Flint had a corrosion control program; the DEQ respond ed the city had an optimized program in place. But in April the EPA as!<ed again, and the DEQ said that the Flint Water Treatment Plant {WTP) was not doing corrosion control. DEQ later explained that its first response referred to its program to monitor a new water source (in this case, the Flint river) for lead/copper for two consecutive six-month periods to determine optimal corrosion treatment. The report says there's no reason to believe that DEQ willfully misrepresented information to the EPA. It also concludes that ODWMA employees appeared to have notified management prop~rly about the unfolding Flint water situation. DEQ did not consult with the EPA on how best to apply the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) monitoring practices after the switch to Flint w ater, but from past experience, DEQ believed it was doing so correctly by doing two rounds of six-month monitoring on the new water source before determining optima l corrosion control. The EPA disagreed w ith DEQ's interpretation of t he LCR, but later stated that the LCR was open to interpretation. It th en clarified the rule; the upshot: corrosion controls already in place when Flint w as on Detroit water should have been maintained after the switch. DEQ should have notified the Flint WTP to start corrosion controls once t he first ro.und of six··month sampling results arrived in late March 2015 and showed the water exceeded acceptable lead levels.
1

DEQ doesn't oversee the Flint WTP so it doesn't have any accountability measures to ensure the WTP is collecting water samples from tier 1 homes, i.e., residences with lead service lines, soldering or plumbing. Instead, DEQ relies on Flint's certification of sa mple sites. The aud itor suggests DEQ should consider an independent verification of the sampling pool or Flint's certifications. In November 2015, Flint admitted that it had no way to ensure the sites were all tier 1. Water samples came from 175 randomly distributed testing bottles. DEQ has asked Flint to verify its prior samples by this Wednesday (12/30}. There's been controversy that DEQ dropped two sampling sites with high lead levels from its second six-month review. It was appropriate for DEQ to do so because those sites did not meet federal criteria. It was also appropriate f or DEQ to require flushing taps the night before sampling to ensure faucets didn't contain overly stagnant water. Charts show that most water samples were taken in the sixth month of the six-month test,ing period. The report said it's tough to determine if the lateness of the sampling affects the accuracy. The report ends with an excellent time line. I have attached the report in case you want to review the timeline on page

11.

Meegan Holland Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder Office: 517-335-6397

!!!!!IJII

2

From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) Sent: Monday, Decem To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Scott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ @michigan.gov>; Baird, Richard r @m ichigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michiga n.gov>; Hollins, Harvey {GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Posthumus, Dick (GOV) <Posth umusd@m ichigan.gov>; Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayD1@michigan .gov>; Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HollandM2@michigan.gov>; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) <LyonN2@ michigan.gov> Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) <WyantD@michigan.gov> Subject: FW: Audit or General Lett er- City of Flint Drinki ng Water

FYI - Please see the attached letter. The Auditor General findings are consistent with the DEQ's own internal review. The Auditor General delivered the letter to Senator Ananich late Wednesday, December 23, 2015. · Please call me if you have any questions. Dan Wyant Director Attachment
Frorn: MI_Office_ oUhe_Auditor_Genera I [ mailto: mi auditor general@audgen. michigan .gov] Sent: Wednesday, December 23, 2015 3:18 PM

To: a!eavltt@senate.michigan.gov; sstudley@senate.michiqan.gov Cc: Hirst, Laura (OAG); Ringler, Doug (OAG); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Sygo, Jim (DEQ) Subject: Auditor General Letter - City of Flint Drinking Water
Please see the attached letter, which add resses your questions about the City of Flint's drinking water. We stand ready to answer any questions th at you may have . Thank you.

1

OAG---:::~:~=::-·
Auditor General
201 N. Wru;hlogton Sqmu:e, Si..-th Floo( · Lansing; Michigan 48913 · Phone: (517) 33+8050 · www.audgen.micbignu.gov

Office of the Autlitor Gcncml ....~--~-----~-----~~-.,·-------

December 23, 2015

The Honorable Jim Ananich Senat e Minority Leader State Capitol, Room S- 105 Lal!sing, Michigan Dear Senator Ananich: Enclosed are answers to the questions you posed in your October 20, 2015 letter to our office regarding the audit we are conducting of the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA), Department of Environmental Quality (DEO), specific to lead contamination in the City of Flint's drinking water. Also enclosed are additional questions we developed that are rel evant to these issues, along with five exhibits: · · · · A map showing Flint water samples by zip code. A map showing lead counts of 5 parts per billion or higher. Two charts showing the number of samples by time period and zip code . A time line of the Flint water review.

We appreciate the opportunity to assist you in answering questions regarding this topic. If you have further questions or a request f or other services, please do not hesitate to contact our office. Sincerely,

D.VJ I,._,!~
Doug Ringler Auditor General Enclosures

Q 1:

How does ODWMA ensure the data it receives is accurate? A: With regard to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) monitoring requirements, DEQ relies on the following key controls to ensure the accuracy of t est results: · · · State-owned laboratories test water samples. State-owned laboratories send test results directly to DEQ. The City of Flint Water Treatment Plant (Flint WTP) certifies whether sample sites are classified as tier 1 ·.

The current Flint WTP LCR sampling process includes:

1. DEQ informs the Flint WTP of the required water lead and copper sample size .

2. The Flint WTP determines the pool of t ier 1 sites for sampling.
3 . The Flint WTP selects the sample. 4. The Flint WTP sends out sample kits and instructions to residents for collecting water samples. ·

5. Residents leave samples and signed sampling forms outside their front
doors.

6. The Flint WTP empl.oyee picks up samples and forms from residents.

7. The Flint WTP employee reviews sample forms for completeness.
8. The Flint WTP employee sends samples to the State-owned laboratories. 9. State-owned laboratories test samples and provide results directly to DEQ.
10. DEQ receives water lead and copper sample results, which include the following information: date collected, date received, address where collected, type of residence (e.g., single family or apartment), and sample point (e .g., kitch en sink or bathroom sink). · 11. DEQ tracks, and follows up if necessary, the number of samples collected by the Flint WTP to help ensure that the required minimum number of samples are collectea by the monitoring period deadline.

Single-family or multiple-family residence with lead service line, lead solder copper piping construct ed after 1982, or lead plumbing. Page 1

12. The Flint WTP submits lead and copper report to DEQ that certifies
wheth er sample sites meet tier ·1 criteria .

13. DEQ prepares the LCR 90th percentile calcu lation report.
During our review, we noted two potential improvements f or the Flint WTP sampling process (see Question 5 of the additional questions answered by the OAG regarding tier 1 sample validity): · DEQ could verify th at the sampling pool was limited to only tier 1 sample sites to ensure that the Flint WTP is in compliance w ith the LCR (Title 40 , Part 141, section 86(a)(3) of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR]). DEQ could independently verify the validity of sample site certifications.

· Q2:

What accountability measures are in place for ODWMA staff who fail to follow data verification protocols? A : DEQ does not provide any direct oversight over the Flint WTP and, therefore, does not have any accountability measures over the Flint WTP 's LCR data verification protocols. DEO's data verification protocol for lead and copper water sampling is limited to verification that the WTP certifies samples submitted to the State-owned laboratories for analysis (see steps 7 and 1 2 in the Flint WTP LCR sampling process noted in Question 1 above) . We did not identify any inst ances in w hich ODWMA staff failed to verify that submitted samples were certified by t he Fl int WTP.

I

Q3:

What accountability measures are in place for ODWMA staff who lie or misrepresent information t o the EPA? A : As with all classified employees, ODWMA staff must adhere to the rul es and regulations established by t he Michigan Civil Service Commission. If any ODWMA staf(were determined to misrepresent information to the EPA, they would be subject to Civil Se rvice Rule 2-6, Discipline, w hich allows an appointing autho rity to discipline an employee for just cause up to and including dismissal. We are not aware of any DEO-establ ished measures that are in add ition to the Civil Servi ce Rules. We gained access t o the e-mail accounts of key DEQ management (DEQ Director, Deputy Direct or, ODWMA Chief , and other key ODWMA staff) extending back t o January 1, 2013 . We did so to identify t he key decision points and conversations that occurred lead in g up to and through the situation in Flint. Our review was also intended to det ermine whether State, Flint, or other officials attempted t o concea l key test results or ot her information. We noted one e-m ail exchange between DEQ and t he EPA that appears to be a sign ificant contributor to the concern that DEQ misrepresented information to t he EPA. The EPA requested clarification on February 26, 2015 regarding the type of optimized corrosion control treatment the Flint WTP was using . DEQ responded on February 27, 20'15 that the cit y had an optimized corrosion cont rol program in place, but DEQ did not provide any program details. DEQ informed us. t hat the Flint WTP corrosion control program in cluded performing

Page 2

lead and copper monitoring for two consecutive six-month periods to determine whether corrosion control treatment would be necessary in the future. However, it appears the EPA interpreted corrosion control program to mean that corrosion control treatment was being performed. On April 23, 2015, the EPA again inquired as to what the Flint WTP was doing for corrosion control treatment. DEQ responded on April 24, 201 5 that the Flint WTP was not practicing corrosion control treatment. Based on our review of this and other e-mails, w e have no specific reason to believe that DEQ willfully misrepresented the information to the EPA. Q.4: What policies do DEQ and ODWMA have in place to escalate major infractions up the chain of command? A: We did not note any instances of major infractions (i.e., intentional disregard o.f policies, laws, regulations or specific directions) committed by DEQ staff during t he course of our review. DEQ does not have a formal policy or procedure in place to escalate major infractions perform ed by ODWMA employees; however, our review of DEQ correspondence confirmed the escalation of key issues up the chain of command related to the Flint situation. DEQ stated that its informal policy is for staff to notify the proper level of management of infractions to determ ine necessary action.

Page 3

OAG. ·--·-----~'!!~:A~::~·
Office of the Audltor General ~- _ · -----~-~-

--~---~-~-·M·

Application of the LCR Q 1: How did the Flint WTP become the primary water supplier for the City of Flint? A: Upon notification of the City of Flint's plans to switch to the l<aregnondi Water Authority (I<WA) in April 2013, the Detroit Water and Sewerage Depart ment (DWSD) submitted a letter to the City of Flint stating that it would terminate its agreement to provide water services on April 17, 2014: According to DEQ management, the Flint WTP attempted to negotiate with the DWSD to maintain it as the City of Flint water supplier; however, after negotiations were unsuccessful, the City of Flint notified DEQ through a permit request of its intent to operate the Flint WTP full time using the Flint River. Although the Flint City Council voted in March 2013 in support of moving to the I<WA pipeline, the vote was silent on the use of the Flint River as a temporary drinking water source. DEQ informed us that in the 1990s, the City of Flint upgraded the Flint WTP to serve as a backup sou rce of water for emergencies. In 2006, the Flint WTP began quarterly testing of the treated Flint River water at the Flint WTP to ensure water quality standards were met; however, the Flint WTP did not test the water's effect on the distribution system at consumer tap locations.

02 .

Did DEQ consult with the EPA prior to determining how to apply the LCR? A: DEQ did not consult with the EPA on how to apply the LCR prior to implementing two consecutive six-month monitoring periods of the Flint WTP beginning July 1, 20 14. Based on past experiences applying the LCR monitoring requirements, DEQ believed that it had appropriately applied the LCR requirements of a large water system.

03:

When Flint switched to the Flint River water source, should corrosion control treatment have been maintained? A: We believe that corrosion control treatment should have been maintained. According to the LCR, a water system can achieve optim ized corrosion control if it submits results of tap water monitoring for t wo consecutive six-month monitoring per.iods w ith accept able lead levels. However, a water system that has optimized corrosion control, and which has treatment in place, should continue to ope rate and maintain optimal corrosion control t reatment. DEQ staff explained t hat they did not treat the switch to Flint River water as a new system, but as a new sour ce. DEQ further stated that because the Flint River was a new water source and there was a change in chemicals needed to t reat the new source, a corrosion control study was needed to determine the impact on the water distribution system . Therefore, it was DEQ's interpretation that t wo rounds of six-month monitoring were still needed to evaluate the wat er quality and determine optim al corrosion control treatment.

Page 4

The Flint water system had optimal corrosion control t reatment when the DV\(SD WTP was the wa~er supplier. Based on our review of notes .from ·a July 21, 2015 EPA and DEQ conference call on DEQ's implementation of the LCR regarding whether the Flint WTP should have continued to maintain corrosion control treatment, it appeared that the EPA did not agree .with DEQ's interpretation of the LCR. Region 5 EPA staff explained that they would tall< to the EPA headquarters about the interpretation of regulations and believes that systems that have been deemed optimized need to "maintain" corrosion contro l. The Region agreed to provide supporting regulatory citations for the language about maintaining corrosion control. On November 3, 2015, the EPA issued a memorandum stating that the LCR had differing possible interpretations; however, the EPA concluded that it is important for large water systems to take the steps necessary to ensure that appropriate corrosion control treatment is maintained at all times, thus ensuring that public health is protected. Based on t his clarification, it appears that corrosion control treatment should have been maintained.

04:

Should DEQ have required the Flint WTP to start pursuing optimized corrosion control treatment after the first round of six~month sampling results were above the lead action level of 5 parts per billion (ppb)? A: Yes. According to DEO's application of the LCR, within six months after the end of the monitoring period in which the water sample results exceeded the acceptable lead level, DEO should have required the Flint WTP to start pursuing optimized corrosion control treatment. The LCR stat es that the lead action level is exceeded if the lead level, as determined by the 90th percentile calculation, is greater than 1 5 ppb. If the lead action level is exceeded, water systems are required to take additional actions including educating the public about lead in drinking water as well as commencing lead service line replacement if the water system has already installed corrosion control and/or source water treatment. However, for water systems that have not yet implemented corrosion control treatment, they can be deemed to have optimized corrosion control without installing treatment if they can demonstrate lead levels below 5 ppb for two consecutive six~month periods. The f irst round of six-month sampling results was received in late March 2015. Because the results were 1 ppb over the lead action level of 5 ppb, DEO would not be able to achieve two consecutive six-month periods below 5 ppb. Therefore, DEQ should have notified the Flint WTP to start pursuing optimized corro sion control treatment. However, DEQ waited until the second round of sampling was completed (June 30, 2015) to assess whether water sample results improved.

Water Samples · 05: Did DEQ verify that only tier 1 sample sites were selected by the Flint WTP in the two rounds of six-month samples? A: DEO. did not verify that only tier 1 sample sites were selected . DEQ relies on the Flint WTP' s certification of samp le sites and does not perform any independent verification of those certifications.

Page 5

In a November 19, 2015 Flint Journal article, the Flint WTP indicated that it did not have the ability to ensure that all sites were t ier 1 . In fact, water samples came from the random distribution of 175 testing bottles w ithout regard for whether t he homes were at risk for high lead levels. DEO issued a formal memorandum on November 9, 2015 requesting that the Flint WTP verify the classifi cation of all prior sample items. The results are due back from the Flint WTP on December 30, 2015 . DEQ dropp~d two water sampling sites from its second six-month sample (January 1, 2015 through June 30, 2015). Was this appropriate? A : Yes, it was appropriate for DEQ to drop these two water samp ling sites. Federal regulation 40 CFR 141.86(a) states :
· · · each water system shall complete a materials evaluation of its distribution system in order to identify a pool of targeted sampling sites that meets the ·requirements of this section . .. All sites from w hich first draw samples are collect ed shall be selected from this pool ... Sampling sites may not include faucets that have point-of-use or point-of-entry treatment devices designed t o remove inorgan ic contaminants. 11 11

06:

This regulation also requires that a water system' s targeted sampling pool consist of only tier 1 sampling sites if an adequat e number is available to meet monitoring requirements. According to federal regulation 40 CFR 141 .86(f), the State may invalidate a water sample if it determines that the sample was taken from a site that did not meet the site selection criteri a. A sample invalidated per this regulation does not count t oward determining lead or copper 90th percentile levels or toward meeting the minimum monitoring requirements. DEO dropped one water sample site from its 90th percentil e calculations because the site was f rom a business that does not meet the t ier 1 requirements of being a single-family or mu ltiple-family residence. T he second sample site was dropped because the home had a point-of-entry treatment device to filter cont aminants. Based on the criteria specified above, it appears t hat DEQ' s rationale for dropping the samples from these two sites appropriately met th e requirements for invalidating. samples per federa l reg ul ation 40 CFR 14 1.86.

07:

Was flushing of the taps the night before drawing a sample an appropriate sample methodology? A: Yes. The LCR req uires that samples be a first draw of water after six hours of st agnation . The LCR does not indicate whether or not t he water line should be f lushed prior to collecting the sample . In the sample instructions, DEQ required preflushing to ensure that sampled faucets were not stagnant for an excessive period of t ime beyond the targeted six hours (e.g., rarely used f aucets or when a homeowner has been gone for an ext ended period of t ime. ) The LCR requires six hours of stagnation; however, it does not preclude DEQ from instructing residents to flush prior to stagnation .

Page 6

AG 0n ·
1

,

~-~~--- ~-~~;~~;~;:~-:~~:;Sample Locations (Exhibit #1)

.

In calendar year 1 992, the Flint WTP established a tier 1 sample site pool for LCR monitoring. With the change to the Flint River water, the Flint WTP needed to increase the _ pool of sample locations because of additional sampling requirements. The following · exhibit documents the 2014 and 2015 sample locations for LCR monitoring. Based on the data obtained during our review, we could not determine how the locations were selected or whether they were properly classified as tier 1 sample sites. As noted in Question 5 of the additional questions answered by the OAG, DEQ has requested the Flint WTP to verify the tier 1 cl?ssification of all prior sample items.

~7

(

'·

j,

48505

t-:::-,.,) ~r\J.,
L_ .
·
48506
'f..,

··
~

·

·
48504

...

··

···L...----.,. ..
···

'

oi J ..

.,·"'·

. .

· ····

~

·
,;

t

·

··

.··

e

0

e
Sourc e:

0

Samples taken in 2014 Sample t aken in 2014 outside of city limits. Samples taken in 2015 Samples taken in 2014 and 2015

The OAG prepared this map using dat a obtained from DEQ and ~t~Qpen S treet Map contributors (opendatacommons. org) . The sample locat ion s are approximote.

Page 7

~--~.
~

. OAG·--~··=n~·~a::::ati:~tZ:~~~~~~i-o m
1 cc ol't1eA.u ttorGcncml _ _~~~~

.

.

d· .

5 Parts Per Billion or Higher (Exhibit #2)
~---

--~-·

This exhibit documents the 2014 and 20 15 sample locations w ith lead counts of 5 ppb or higher. This inform ation is used in agg regate by DEQ to determine if the city has optimized lead levels.

···
~·

·

·

·

·

·

8

e

Samples taken in 2014 Samples taken in 201 5 Samples taken in 2014 and 2015, with only high levels of lead in 2015

Source:

The OAG prepared this map using data obtained from DEQ and 0 0penStreetMap contributors (opendatacommons.org). The sample locations are approximate.

Page 8

·~·~~ ~~ OAG--"---:::~=~=~1
·--

. . ·. :.

Time Period and Zip Code (Exhibit #3)
a

Office ,o ft l C Auditor Gcner:tl - - -

--~---··-----~-~~

This chart expands on Exhibit 111 to show a summary by zip code and time of selection w ithin the sampling period. Based on the d ata obtained during our review, we could not determine if t he lateness of selection within the monitoring period affected t he appropriateness of the sample items.

40

37
.48532

35

0 48507 Cl48506

30

1:148505 0 48504

25

a 48503
D 48502

20

15

10

5
0

0
January 2015 February 2015 March 2015 April 2015 May 2015 June 2015

Source: The OAG prepared thi s chart using data obtained from DEQ.

Page 9

This chart expands on Exhibit #1 to show a summary by zip code and time of selection within the sampling period. Based on the data obtained during our review, we could not determine if the lateness of selection within t he monitoring period affected the appropriateness of the sample items.

100 90 80 70 60

94

50
40 30 20 10 0

0
August 2014

0 September 2014

0 October 2014 November 2014 December 2014

0
July 2014

Source: The OAG prepared this chart using data obtained from DEQ.

Page 10

Octob., 1, 2015 · Michigon Oepor.rnent of Hedlh and Hvman S<rvic= confirms rcst.Jil:!; of Hur1oy

Medical Center stu:::ly.
· City of i'TII'~ ursos residents to not d1ink water.

Octt>bo:t 8; 2015
Jomt.-ary 1. 2015

I

City of F!jm: develops ploo to

OEO begins the second six-"""'th Flint il>ad/copper ~ perio:i

recon.,_-ct :o OWSO.

I
Januory 12.2015
July 2014

Octt>b:r 16, 2015 City of Flint recoc-.nec:s to DWSD. Oc:tober 19, 2015 D:O Director Dan Wyant states: ".·. steff made a mistake whlle working with the city of Rint. Srnply stot&J, sraif employed a federal !!Xllr.lSDn ccntrcll pmtoa:l

I

DEO begins the r.m si>«noooh Rint lead/copper mcnttoring period.
Man:~2013

I

OWSO offers the City of F!jm: a woiver of the S4 milion reconnecticn fee to switch ~cJc to Detroit water.
January 29, 2015
March 30, 2015

August 17.2015

May28,2015

oro notifies the Ant WTP of the soccnd six-month lez:ficcpp:r monitoring results.
August 23, 2015

nrn City Councl v:rted 7-1,.
join Karegoondi Water Authority

IKWAl.

I

I

Mi<!·March 2014

I

City of F!jm:decides10 use the Aim River as a water source.

City of Aint en'.ergency manager Jerry Ambrese declines DWSD water source reconnection.

DEQ n:nilies t1e F!jm:WfP of the forst six-month le>dlccpper
monitorTng period,

Somple results from 1l1e ~enee noted wid> high levels en nbruary 26, 2015 shew leed levels look good after.

vrg;n;o Tech rese..-.:her noti!ies
DEO ,;,at he wll besin a sttJdy of tlu> City oi Flint water quality:

new copper service li1c insnllletion.

tr.ay believed was apptt)ptiall!, ;)nd it \"'aS not.·

I

I
2013

I
April16,2013
C"lty of Rim emergcn..'")l monoger Ed Kunz .si;no

I

I
2014-

I
J

l·
I
FebNary 3, 2015

I
I
April24, 2015 0:0 indicares no corrosion con-.rol (cnhophcsphate) chemical in pio<:e C uealment).

I
20 15

J
I July 21,2015

I
I I
November 3, 2015
The E?A ind"re.otes diffe:ing possible irr.erJntz"".ions of :he LCR wilh r=to how t!1e LCR's optimal corrcS:on contrtX ~ent ~roccC::ure.s apply to 'this ::ituotion !now w=r sou:ce/new

I

I

L

April25.Z014

Sep!<mber 2, 2015

City of Rint switches to Frutt

River water.

z;reemerrt 10 sv.ritch from

I

Govemor Snvd<!r awa<ds the City of flint $2 milicn u: find le.>lcs lind teplace wasteWater inc:i'\emor.

The E?A ond DEQ hold confere.-.ce coli on DEQ's implementation of the Leod end
Ccpper Rule (LCR) ond Rin'
Issues,

DetrcitWmer end Sevveregc:
Dep!rvnent (DWSD) wmer

Vlrllinia Tech researcllcr dams that :he ccrrosNeness of t1u> Aint v.rr.er Is causing lcz.d tO le!Ch r.to residents' water.
Septmlber 2<0, 2015
H<.<ley Mod"o=<l c.m.r study isslled showing high bleed load le~~els L, City of Flint chudrcn.

I I
I
1

source to 'tCWA

FebnJ><Y 26, 2015 The E?A discusses a resicfem's water sample testi:lg res:Jits wilh DEQ (high lev1!ls of lead fo\J!1d in

vr.nertreatmenO.

April17,2013

DWSD sal:lltwm stOP seUing \I'V2ter 10 1h ~ City of Aint in
A~ri2014.

watert.
FebriJ:Jry ZJ, 2015

DEQ rospcnded 1D 111e EPA saying that the Frrn WTP has "'
optimimd
COJT:)Si'Oil

control

progr.rn.

Source: ihe OAG prepared this 'time rine using dat., r~maits, meet!n; notes, t~nd letters)' obtained ftom DEQ, newspaper and ~ress release erticles, tt1e Flintwaterstudy.org, lind the Hurley Medic~! Center survey

resutts.
?ose

From: Ken Sikkema [mailto:l<sikkema@pscinc.com] Sent: Tuesday, Decem 12:26 PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) Cc: Chris Kolb <chris@environmenta Davis <mattdav@med.umich.edu>; Eric Rothstein <erothste@grg-ltd.com>; Lawrence Reynolds <reynolds@mottchc.org> Subject: Attached Letter from Flint Water Advisory Task Force

Dear Govemor: The Flint Water Advisory Task Force, which you appointed on October 21,2015, has devoted considerable time and eff01t to our review ofthe contamination of the Flint Water supply. Ow: focus has been on assessing what happened, why it happened, and what is needed to prevent any recunence in Flint or elsewhere in the state. We have also, as you know, been assessing on~going mitigation efforts. Attached is a letter rep01ting our finding as to who bears the primary responsibility for what happened in Flint. We are sending this letter now .because it has become clear to us that ascribing responsibility and ensuring accountability is both critical and mgent, and simply crumot wait for om fmal report. Establishing responsibility and accountability is the :J:irst step in re-establishing the trust between the citizens of Flint and their government and the agencies whose responsibility it is to protect their health. The current level of distrust also serves to compromise the effective delivery of protected services designed to address ongoing public health issues. Thank you for the support you have given us and your demonstrated conunitment to respond to om· findings and recommendations. On behalf of the Task Force Ken Sikkema

KenSHckema Senior Polley Fellow l)ublic Sector Consultants PH: 517-484~4954 ksikl{ema@pscinc.corri

1

December 29, 2015

Dear Governor Snyder: The Flint Water Advisory Task Force, which you appointed on October 21, 2015, has devoted considerable effort and countless hours to our review of the contamination of the Flint water supply: what happened, why It occurred, and what is needed to prevent a recurrence in Flint or elsewhere in the state. We have also been assessing ongoing mitigation efforts to help assure th at short- and long'term public health issues and water management concerns will be properly addressed to safeguard the health and well being of the Flint comm unity. Shortly after we began our work, we recognized th e immediate need for better coordination of the state's response to the ongoing public health Issues in Flint, and for assignment of a single person to provide this coordination. We addressed these concerns in a letter to you on December 7, 2015, and you responded with Immediate adoption of these recommendations. We thank you for the commitment your response demonstrates. In our continuing efforts, we have now interviewed numerous individuals at state and local levels; reviewed many documents, articles, and emails; and deliberated repeatedly as a group. Both individually and as a group, we h ave visited Flint several times during the past several weeks to meet w ith citizens, public health officials and healthcare provi de~s, Individuals who have water management responsibilities at the city and county levels, and other public officials. It Is clear to us, particularly as we listen to t he people of Flint, that It Is both critical and urgent to establish responsibility for what happened in t heir community and to ensure accountability. This is a first step in a long process to re-establish the trust they no longer have in their government and the agencies whose responsibility it is to protect their health . It is urgent because this deep distrust of government continues to compromise the effective delivery of protective services designed to address ongoing public health issues. It is for these reasons that we are sending this letter at this time. We believe the primary responsibility for what happened in Flint rests with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). Although many individuals and entities at state and local levels contributed to creating and prolonging the problem, MDEQ is the government agency that has responsibility to ensure safe drinking water in Michigan. It failed in that responsibility and must be held accountable for that failure . The Safe Drinl.<ing Water Act (SDWA) places responsibility for compliance with its requirements on the public water system. In this instance, the City of Flint had the responsibility to operate its water system within SDWA requirements, under the jurisdiction ofthe MDEQ. The role of the MDEQ is to ensure compliance with the SDWA through its regulatory oversight as the primary agency having enforcement responsibility for the Flint water system. The MDEQ failed in three fundamental ways. Regulatory Failure We believe that in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA) at MDEQ, a culture exists in which "technical complian ce" is considered sufficient to ensure safe drinking water in Michigan.

This minimalist approach to regulatory and oversight responsibility is unacceptable and simply insufficient to the task of public protection. It led to M DEQ's failure to recognize a number of indications that switching the water source in Flint would - and did-compromise both water safety and water. quality. The MDEQ made a number of decisions that were, and con tinue to be, justified on the basis that federal ru les "allowed" those decisions to be made. ODWMA must adopt a posture that is driven not by this minimalist technical compliance approach, but rather by one that is founded on what needs to be

done to assure drinking water safety.
A culture change must occur within ODWMA. It must be driven by a mission that is aspirational regarding the role of the MDEQ in ensuring the safety and the quality of Michigan's drinking water. We believe, and have expressed to MDEQ Director Dan Wyant, that as a Great Lakes State, Michigan should aspire to have the safest drinking water in the nation, rather than merely aiming for technical compliance with regulatory requirements. Failure In Substance and Tone of MDEQ Response to ·the Public Throughout 2015, as the public raised concerns and as independent studies and testing were conducted and brought to the attention of MDEQ, the agency's response was often one of aggressive dismissal, belittlement, and attempts to discredit these efforts and th e individuals involved. We f ind both the tone and substance of many MDEQ public statements to be completely unacceptable. In a real way, the MDEQ represents the public, including the very Individu als it t reated dismissively and disrespectfully In public statements. We recognize that the agency might disagree with the opinions of others on a variety of issues, including testing protocol, Interpretation of testing resu lts, the requirements offederallaw and rules, and other matters. What is disturbing about MDEQ's responses, however, is their persistent tone of scorn and derision. In fact, the MDEQ seems to have been more determined to discredit the work of others- who ultimately proved to be right- than to pursue Its own oversight responsibility. Failure in MDEQ lnterpret(jtion of the Lead and Copper Rule The federal ~ead and Copper Rule (LCR) is central to what happened in Flint, because that rule, at least theoretically, is designed to prevent lead and copper contamination of drinking water. The federal LCR calls for "optimized corrosion control treatm ent," which the MDEQ did not require in the switch to the Flint River. Prior to the switch, MDEQ staff instructed City of Flint w ater treatment staff that corrosion control treatment (CCT) was not necessary until two six-month monitoring periods had been conducted. The need for CCT would be evaluated after the resu lts from t hose two monitoring periods were reviewed. The decision not to require CCT, m\)de at the direction of the MDEQ, led directly to the 'contamination of the Flint water system. The MDEQ seems to have taken different positions on whether it faithfully followed th e LCR in th e Flint situation. It f irst maintained that it followed the LCR, then st ated that it did not follow th e ru le properly, and most recently claimed that a federal memorandum issued by t he US EPA in early November 2015 suggests that the original M DEQ interpretation was possibly correct. We are not convinced. Even the MDEQ's latest interpretation of th e US EPA's November memorandum is overly legalistic and misunderstands the intent of the LCR, which is to minimize risks of lead and copper exposure for human health. We believe ODWMA's single-minded legalistic focus is the heart of the problem, and it is part of the "t echnical compliance" culture described above. ODWMA should not be basing its actions solely on a

2

legally possible interpretation of the LCR. It should be focusing on how to protect Michigan's citizens from lead in drinl(ing water. We met with MDEQ Director Wyant on December 16, 2015, to discuss these issues, as well as many others. We note his substantial agreement with many of our conclusions, particularly as it relates to the regu latory fa ilure and the abysmal public response of his agency. It is our understanding that he has drawn similar conclusions in his own evaluation of the MDEQ's role in the Flint water crisis. At the same t ime, it was disappointing to hear his weak defense of the CCT decision based on the EPA's November 2015 memorandum. We are not finished with our work. Other individuals and entities made poor decisions, contributing to and prolonging the contaminati on of the drinking water supply in Flint. As an example, we are particularly concerned by recent revelations of MDHHS's apparent early knowledge of, yet silence about , elevated blood lead levels detected among Flint's children. We also feel it important to further review local government decision processes un.der emergency management. Our final report will highlight and discuss those concerns, among many others, to provide some context to a comprehensive series of recommendations. As stated earlier in this letter, however, we believe that establishing responsibility is a critica l and urgent need, and one that should not w alt for our final report in 2016. Individ uals and agencies responsible must be held accountable in a timely fashion. It is our hope that the height ened awareness of th e dangers of lead poisoning can be an opportunity to make Michigan safer, particularly for its children. Drinking water must be recognized as a potential source of health risk exposure when water lines and fixtures containing l.ead are disturbed or compromised. Proper testing, not only in high-risk areas but also in faci lities serving children (e.g., schools), must be considered. Facilitating long-term financing of a model public health program, and also replacement of lead-containing water service lines and fixt ures, would enable Michigan to realize a positive lasting legacy from th e t ragedy ofthe Flint water crisis. Our fina l report will address some of t hese issues. Th e City of Flint's water customers-fellow M ichigan citizens-were needlessly and tragically exposed t o toxic levels of lead through th eir drinking water supp ly. Th ey deserve a commitment to properly assess responsibility and ensure accountability. Th ey also deserve a commitment to needed mitigation in both the short and long t erm . The Flint water crisis never should have happened. Having failed to prevent it, state government should coordinate a sust ained, public-health-focused response to remedy, to the fullest ext ent possible, the Impacts on the Flint community. Respectfully yours,

Flint Water Advisory Task Force: Matt Davis Chris l<olb Larry Reynolds Eric Rothstein l(en Sikkema

3

From : Agen, Jarrod (GOV) Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 8:25 PM To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) . - . , Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV~cott, Allison (GOV) <scotta12@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov> Subject: Flint letter

Governor, Attached is a letter from the Flint Water Task Force which will be f01mally sent to you tomonow. The Task Force then plans to release this letter publicly on Wednesday morning. You will see the letter is harsh ag~inst DEQ. Rich, Redford, Harvey, Meegan, and myself all just gathered on a conference call to discliss our upcoming actions regarding Flint. While we don't think this letter should change any of our actions, we agreed we may need to accelerate some of the structural changes at DEQ.
Our suggestions:

1) Mah:e structural changes at DEQ as early as tomorrow: The recommendations in this letter suggest profound change at DEQ and openly criticize Director Wyant. If this is the path that the Task Force is on, it is best to make changes at DEQ sooner rather than later. That likely means accepting Dan's resignation. It also means moving up the termination of the 3 DEQ personal previously planned for Jan 4 to tomorrow. 2) Still do statement tomol'l'OW from you regarding Flint: This statement will be slightly revised by Meegan to acknowledge we received feedback fmm the Task Force and reiterate that we created the Task Force with the intent of getting honest independent feedback. More importantly, if we are making changes at DEQ, they can also be announced in the statement.

·rr you have a moment, it is probably best that Rich & I discuss with you over the phone tomorrow
rooming. But I wanted to get you some of our thinking tonight. Let me lmow if there is a good time to discuss tomorrow. Thanks Janod
1

Dear Governor Snyder: The Flint Water Advisory Task Force, which you appointed on October 21, 2015, has devot ed considerab le effort and countless hours to our review of the contaminat ion of the Flint water supply: what happened, why it occurred, and what is needed to prevent a recurrence in Flint or elsewh ere in t he stat e. W e have also been assessing ongoing mitigation efforts to help assure t hat short- and longterm public hea lth issues and w ater management concerns w ill be properly addressed t o safeguard the health and well being of the Flint community. Shortly after we bega n our work, we recognized the immediate need fo r better coordination ofthe state's response to the ongoing public health issues in Flint, and fo r assignment of a single person t o provide this coordination. We a'ddressed these concerns in a letter to you on December 7, 2015, and you responded with immediate adoption of these recommendations. We thank you for the commitment your response demonstrates. In our continuing effo rts, we have now interviewed numerous individuals at stat e and local levels; reviewed many documents, articles, and emails; and deliberated repeatedly as a group. Both individually and as a group, we have visited Flint severa l times during the past several weeks to meet with citizens, public health officials and healthcare providers, 'individ ua ls who have water management responsibilities at t he city and county levels, and other publ!c officials. It is clear to us, particularly as we listen to the people of Flint, that it is both critical and urgent to establish responsibility for what happened in their c~m munity and to ensure accountability. This is a first step in a long process to re-esta blish the trust they no longer have in their government and the agencies whose responsibility it is to protect their health. It is urgent beca use this deep distrust of government continues to compromise the effective delivery of protective services designed to ad dress ongo ing public hea lth issues. It is for these reasons that we are sending this letter at this time. We believe the primary responsibility for what happened in Flint rests with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). Although many individuals and ·e ntities at state and local levels contributed to creating and prolonging the problem, MDEQ is the government agency that has responsibility to ensure safe drinking water in Michigan. It failed in that responsibility and must be held accountable for that failure. The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) places responsibility for compliance with its requirements on the public water system. In this instance, the City of Flint had the responsibility to operate it s water system The role of the MDEQ is to ensure within SDWA requirem ents, und er the jurisdiction of the MDEQ. . compliance w ith the SDWA through its regulatory oversight as the primary agency having enforcement responsibility for th e Flint water syst em. The MDEQ failed in three fund amental ways. Regulatory Failure We believe that in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA) at MDEQ, a culture exist s in which "technical comp liance" is considered sufficient to ensure safe drinking water in Michigan. This minimalist approach to regulatory and oversight responsibility is unacceptable and simply insufficient to the task of public protection. It led to MDEQ's failure to recognize a num ber of indications

I I
I

I
I

I

I

I

that switching the water sourc~ in Flint would-and did-compromise both water safety and water quality. The MDEQ made a number of decisions that were, and continue to be, justified on the basis that federa l rules "allowed" those decisions to be made. ODWMA must adopt a posture that is driven not by this minimalist technica l compliance approach, but rather by one that is founded on

what needs to be

done to assure drinking water safety.
A culture change must occur within ODWMA. It must be driven by a mission that is aspirational regarding the role of the MDEQ in ensuring the safety and the quality of Michigan's drinking water. We believe, and have expressed to MDEQ Director Dan Wyant, that as a Great Lakes State, Mi<;higan should aspire to have the safest drinking water in the nation, rather than merely aiming for technical compliance with regulatory requirements. Failure in Substance and Tone of MDEQ Response to the Public Throughout 2015, as the public raised concerns and as independent studies and testing were conducted and brought to the attention of MDEQ, the agency's response was often one of aggressive dismissal, belittlement, and attempts to discredit these efforts and the individuals involved. We find both the tone and substance of many MDEQ public statements to be completely unacceptable. In a rea l way, the MDEQ represents the public, including the very individuals it treated dismissively and disrespectfully in public statements. We recognize that the agency might disagree with the opinions of others on a variety of issues, including testing protocol, interpretation of testing results, the requirements offedera llaw and rules, and other matters. What is disturbing about MDEQ's responses, however, is their persistent tone of scorn and derision. In fact, the MDEQ seems to have been more determined to discredit the work of others-who ultimately proved to be right-than to pursue its own oversight responsibility. Failure in MDEQ Interpretation of the lead and Copper Rule The federal Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) is central to what happened in Flint, because that rule, at least theoretically, is designed to prevent lead and copper contaminat ion of drinking water. The federal LCR calls for "optimized corrosion control treatment/' which the MDEQ did not require in the switch to the Flint River. Prior to the switch, MDEQ staff instructed City of Flint water treatment staff that corrosion control treatment (CCT) was not necessary until two six-month monitoring periods had been conducted. The need for CCT would be ·evaluated after the results from those two monitoring periods were reviewed. The decision not to require CCT, made at the direction of the M DEQ, led directly to the contamination of the Flint water system. The MDEQ seems to have taken different positions on whether it faithfully followed the LCR in the Flint situat ion . It first maintained that it followed the LCR, then stated that it did not follow the rule properly, and most recently claimed that a fed eral memorandum issued by the US EPA in early November 2.015 suggests that the original MDEQ interpretation was possibly correct. We are not convinced. Even the MDEQ's latest interpretation of the US EPA's November memorandum is overly legalistic and misunderstands the intent efthe LCR, which is to minimize risks of lead and
1

copper exposure for human health. We believe ODWMA's single-minded legalistic focus is the heart of the problem, and it is part of the "technical compliance" culture described above. ODWMA should not be basing its actions solely on a

legally possible interpretation of the LCR. It should be focusing on how to protect Michigan's citizens from lead in drinl<ing water. We met with MDEQ Director Wyant on December 16, 2015, to discuss these issues, as well as many others. We note his substantia l agreement with many of our conclusions, particularly as it relates to the regulatory failure and the abysmal public response of his agency. It is our understanding that he has drawn similar conclusions in his own evaluation of the MDEQ's role in the Flint water crisis. At the same time, it was disappointing to hear his weak defense of the CCT decision based on the EPA's November 2015 memorandum. We are not finished with our work. other individuals and entities made poor decisions, contributing to and prolonging the contamination of the drinking water supply in Flint. As an example, we are particularly concerned by recent revelations of MDHHS's apparent early knowledge of, yet silence about, elevated blood lead levels detected among Flint's children. We also feel it important to further review local government decision processes under emergency mana~eme nt. Our final report will highlight and discuss those concerns, among many others, to provide some context to a comprehensive series of recommendations. As stated earlier in this letter, however, we believe that establishing responsibility is a critical and urgent need, and one that should not wait for our final report in 2016. Individuals and agencies responsible must be held accountable in a timely fashion. It is our hope that the heightened awareness of the dangers of lead poisoning can be an opportunity to make Michigan safer, particularly for its children. Drinking water must be recognized as a potential source of health risk exposure when water lines and fixtures containing lead are disturbed or compromised. Proper testing, not only in high-risk areas but also in facilities serving children (e.g., schools), must be considered. Facilitating long-term financing of a model public health program, and also replacement of lead-containing water service lines and fixtures, would enable Michigan to realize a positive lasting legacy from the tragedy of the Flint water crisis. Our final report will address some of these issues. The City of Flint's water customers-fellow Michigan citizens-were needlessly and tragically exposed to toxic levels of lead through their drinking water supply. They deserve a commitment to properly assess responsibility and ensure accountability. They also deserve a commitment to needed mitigation in both the short and long term. The Flint water crisis never should have happened. Having failed to prevent it, state government should coordinate a sustained, public-health-focused response to remedy, to the fullest extent possible, the impacts on the Flint community. Respectfully yours, Flint Water Advisory Task Force: l<en Sikkema Chris l<olb Matt Davis Larry Reynolds Eric Rothstein

Snyder, Rick (GOV)
From:

Sent:
To:

Subject:

Holland, Meegan (GOV) Tuesday, December 29, 2015 1:32 PM Snyder, Rick (GOV) The Flint water statement

Here is the statement. It's going to se nior and executive staff, plus directors, very soon. It will go to t he media around 2:30p.m. Rich will respond to the task force in perso n at tomorrow' s task force meeting. We don't plan a written response; however, I'll be com piling talking points from vari ous sen ior staff f or Rich. The statement: When I became aware that the city of Flint's water showed elevated lead levels and that the state's handling of the situation was being questioned, I requested funding to switch the so urce back to the Great Lakes Water Authority and appointed an independent task force to identify possible missteps and areas fo r improvement. The t ask force has done an exceptional job, review ing stacks of documents and interviewing scores of Flint, Genesee County, state and federal officials. Although the t ask force's final report is not yet completed, it has made me aware of some interim findings and corrective steps that I have decided to take immediately in order to restore t rust in how the state keeps its citizens safe and informed. We'll continue to work w ith the community members t o make sure we hear and respond to t he ir concerns. In addition, MDEQ Director Dan Wyant has offered his resignation, and I've determined that it's appropriate to accept it. I'm also maki ng other personnel changes at MDEQ to address problems cited by the task force. But changes in leadership and staff are not enough. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific community. That is w hy I have directed both the departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services t o invite every external scientist w ho has wo rked on this issue to be our partners in helping us improve Flint water. Let's share research on wat er and blood lead level testing so we can arrive at accurate and mutually suppo rted conclusions. Together, we should work to affirm that we're using the very best testing protocols to ensure Fli nt residents have safe drinking water and that we're taking steps to protect their health over the short and long term. I want the Flint community t o know how very sorry I am that this has happened. And I want all Michigan citizens to know that we will learn from this experience, because Flint is not the only city that has an aging infrastructure . I know many Flint citizens are angry and want more than an apology. That's why I'm taking the actions today to ensure a culture of openness and trust. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute water f ilters, and help in other ways. Last week, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we' re going to meet soon to discuss other w ays the state can offer assistance. These are only initial steps- we fully expect to take more actions following t he recommendations of our task force. When it comes to matters of hea lth and quality of life, we're committed to doing everything we can to protect the wellb eing of our citize ns.

1

Meegan Holland Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder Office: 517-335-6397 Mobile: 517-420-2714 Twitter: @meholland

2

